# Why arguments matter
[BLANK_AUDIO]. Hi. Welcome to our Coursera course. This is the first time we've ever taught an online course, and we're very excited about it. >> All right! [LAUGH]. >> I'm Walter Sinnott-Armstrong from Duke University. And my co-teacher is Ram Neta from the University of North Carolina, Chapel Hill. Say hi, Ram. >> Hi. >> Thanks. This is going to be a great course. It's going to cover a lot of important practical issues, raise some fascinating theoretical questions. We'll also try to have some fun, because there're lots of wacky examples where people make silly mistakes and arguments in everyday life. And we'll try to teach you how to avoid those. The title of the course is Think Again. How to reason and argue. And the title pretty much tells you what the course is about. We'll try to teach you to think again about a wide range of issues that effect your life in various ways. We're not going to try to convert you to our point of view or, or teach you to believe what we believe. Instead, we want you to think in a new way and in a deeper way about the issues that matter to you most.
Play video starting at :1:11 and follow transcript1:11
The subtitle of the course, How to Reason and Argue, tells you that we're going to focus on a particular type of thinking, namely reasoning, because most people don't want to be arbitrary or have unjustified beliefs. They want to have reasons for what they think and do. But how do you get reasons? Well, we're going to approach reasons by way of arguments, because arguments are just ways to express reasons.
Play video starting at :1:38 and follow transcript1:38
And if you can understand arguments, you can understand reasons. And if you can formulate good arguments, you can have good reasons for the ways in which you think and behave.
Play video starting at :1:49 and follow transcript1:49
So that's one way in which it's important to understand arguments, namely to get better reasons for your own beliefs and actions. But, another way in which it's very important to understand arguments, is to avoid mistakes. because there's lots of charlatans out there who are going to try to convince you to think the way they want you to think and to behave the way they want you to behave by giving you bad arguments. So you need to spot them and avoid them. Just think about a used car salesman who tries to convince you to buy a, a car, because it looks really cool and you'll look even cooler if you're sitting in the car. Well, that might be a good reason to buy a car and it might not. And you're going to have to figure out which kinds of arguments to believe and which kinds not to believe.
Play video starting at :2:37 and follow transcript2:37
Consider another example, say a lawyer in a courtroom, and you're sitting in the jury, and they're going to try to convince you either to find the defendant guilty or to find the defendant not guilty, but either way, you don't want your decision to be like flipping a coin. You want to have reasons for what you're thinking. And for the verdict that you reach. as a member of the jury. Or, an evangelist tries to convert you to their religious beliefs and to get you to give up your old religious beliefs. Well, you don't want to make that kind of a decision arbitrarily either because it's so important. And then what about your personal life. You might have a friend who says let's go for a cross-country trip. It'll be great. Well, maybe it will and maybe it won't. But you don't want to commit yourself to such a big endeavor without having thought it through properly. How are we going to study arguments. Well, in this course we'll have four parts. The first part, we'll teach you how to analyze arguments. That might seem really simple, you just read the passage and hear what they're saying. But actually it's quite hard because some passages or some sets of words, if we're talking about spoken language, contain arguments and others don't. Here's an example. Consider a letter to the editor. Some letters to the editor don't have arguments at all. They just say, thank people for having behaved in nice ways or done nice things.
Play video starting at :4:7 and follow transcript4:07
On the other hand, other letters to the editor include arguments. They try to convince you. To vote for a certain political candidate for example. So you need to distinguish which passages include arguments and which passages don't include arguments. Then, you need to look at those passages and figure out which of the words, which parts of those passages contain the argument. Then you need to separate out those parts, put them in a certain order, which we'll call standard form. And, often these arguments will have missing parts and you'll have to supply those missing parts or suppressed premises in order to get a full picture of how the argument works. And that's what we'll do in part one. Then in part two, once we've got the argument in shape, we can start to evaluate it. But evaluations are going to depend a lot on what the purpose of the argument is.
Play video starting at :5: and follow transcript5:00
Some arguments try to be valid in a logical way [SOUND] and those are deductive arguments. So we'll start first by looking at deductive arguments and the formal structure of deductive arguments. We'll look at propositional logic, then categorical logic. That'll be part two of the course. Then in part three, we'll look at a different kind of argument, inductive arguments that don't even try to be deductively valid.
Play video starting at :5:25 and follow transcript5:25
Here there are just a lot of different kinds. So we'll look at statistical generalizations, applying generalizations down to particular cases. We'll look at inference to the best explanation and arguments from analogy. We'll look at causal reasoning and probability and decision making. So it'll be a lot of different types of inductive arguments covered in part three.
Play video starting at :5:49 and follow transcript5:49
Then in part four, we'll look at fallacies. These are common. The very tempting ways to make mistakes in arguments. Some of them have to do with vaugeness. Others have to do with ambiguity. Some of them are irrelevance, like arguments ad hominem and appeals to ignorance and we'll also look at a major fallacy called begging the question that people commit all the time. And in the end, we'll teach you a general method for spotting and avoiding these common mistakes. So that'll be part four. And at the end of each part, we'll have a short quiz with some questions to make sure you understood. So we're very glad to have you in this course, and we're very honored that there's so many students in this course. But that raises one problem. Namely, we cannot answer emails from students. So please do not email us individually.
Play video starting at :6:43 and follow transcript6:43
There will be discussion forums where you can go and talk to other students about the material in the course. And I bet that if you go to those forums, not only will you get your questions answered, but if you go to those forums and help answer other people's questions, everybody will learn more and that's what this course is all about. So, thanks very much for joining us on this adventure and we hope you stick with it because we've got a lot of fun and a lot of important things to cover. One final recommendation. We've done these lectures so that you can just watch the lectures by themselves and do the exercises and take the quizzes. However, if you're listening to a lecture and you're having a little trouble understanding it, or if you're really fascinated and you want to get more detail, then there is an accompanying textbook called, Understanding Arguments.
Play video starting at :7:34 and follow transcript7:34
by myself and Robert Fogelin. Many, many, many of the best ideas in this course come from him, he's been a leader in this field of understanding arguments for many decades and I owe awful lot to him and I really appreciate that. So, I want to do a little shout out to thanks to Robert Fogelin before we get started on this course and the next lecture.

# What is an Argument
Well I hope the first lecture convinced you that arguments really matter. Of course, they're not the only things that matters, there's more to life than reason and arguments. but they are something that matters and they matter a lot. So, we need to understand arguments. Now, the first step in understanding arguments is to figure out what arguments are. And the first step in understanding what arguments are is to figure out what arguments are not. Because we want to distinguish arguments from all of those things that don't count as arguing. And the best source of information about what arguments are not, is, of course, Monty Python. Well, that was pretty silly wasn't it? But in the midst of all that silliness we find some truth because after all, many members of the Monty Python troupe were philosophy majors. So each room represents a kind of thing that we need to distinguish from arguments. [INAUDIBLE] So let's think first about getting hit on the head lessons. [NOISE] . Arguments are not like hitting people on the head, you hit poeple on the head when you wrestle. [NOISE]. The point is that arguments are not fights you don't win an argument by hitting somebody on the head. Sometimes little children say that their parents are arguing, when they're really having a verbal fight. >>All this fighting I might as well be back with my parents. Dammit George, I told you if you didn't quit drinking I'd leave you. Well, I guess that makes you a liar because I'm drunk as hell and you're still here. >> But you can not win an argument just by yelling at someone.
Play video starting at :1:42 and follow transcript1:42
That doesn't make the argument any better because that's not the point of arguing. Another room in the Monty Python skit involves abuse. >> Don't give me that you snotty-faced heap of parrot droppings. >> Now abuse is one of the things you do with language, but it's not the same as arguing. You cannot win an argument simply by calling your opponent a stupid git. >> Stupid git. >> And the point of this course is not to teach you to go back and abuse your roommate by calling them nasty names. That will not help you win any argument. It also won't help you win any friends. And another room in the skit has to do with complaining. >> [INAUDIBLE]. >> But all those complaints don't amount to an argument either. They're just expressing your emotion about the situation. Arguing is something different from all of those rooms. So what is arguing? Well, at one point one of the character says. >> Well argument is not the same as contradiction. >>Can be. >> No, it can't. >> So what do they mean by a contradiction? In British English to say a contradiction is just to deny the person or contradict what they said. but contradicting what the person said, that is denying it, is not arguing. I can say, what do you think the best flavor of ice cream in the world? Well I have my favorite. I know what the best flavor is. The best flavor is Ben and Jerry's Coconut Almond Fudge Chip ice cream, There's nothing better. And then you say, no it isn't. Well you haven't argued that it isn't and I haven't argued that it is, we're just disagreeing with each other. We haven't given any reason for any of the positions that we've adopted yet. So, as Monty Python says later on, in different character, argument is an intellectual process. It's a process not just of asserting your views, but of giving some kind of reason for your views.
Play video starting at :3:42 and follow transcript3:42
So the next definition that Monty Python gives of an argument, is that an argument is a connected series of statements to establish a proposition. I take it they mean intended to establish a certain proposition. So that's a pretty cool definition, if you think about it, because it tells you what an argument is made of. It's a series of statements, and statements are made in language, so arguments are made of language. It also tells you what the purpose of argument is. The purpose of argument, they say, is to establish a certain proposition. So now we have a pretty unique definition of argument.
Play video starting at :4:19 and follow transcript4:19
This definition gives us a nice contrast. Because there are lots of other series of statements or sentences that don't count as arguments because they're not intended to establish a proposition. Consider for example a novel, which has statements about what's going on, but it's not necessarily trying to establish any particular proposition. Or a dictionary might have a series of definitions, but it's not intended to establish a certain proposition. Instead, novels and dictionaries order sentences in a different way. They order them either chronologically or alphabetically whereas, arguments are trying to put statements into a certain structure that reflects the order of reasoning in order to establish the proposition according to Monty Python. But Monty Python, no matter how great they are, and they are great, didn't get it quite right because the purpose of an argument is not always to establish a proposition because some propositions that are conclusions of arguments, we already knew.
Play video starting at :5:25 and follow transcript5:25
Consider for example a mathematical proof.
Play video starting at :5:29 and follow transcript5:29
If someone tries to prove the Pythagorean theorem in geometry. People already believe the theorem.
Play video starting at :5:36 and follow transcript5:36
They already knew that it was true. So they weren't trying to establish the proposition. But the proof does something else, it shows you how that proposition is connected to the axioms of the system. It helps you understand why the proposition is true. And, we'll see that other arguments, like explanations, do the same thing. So sometimes arguments are intended to establish a proposition, like Monty Python said, but in other cases they're intended to help us understand the proposition and the reasons why the proposition is true. So we want to distinguish reasons to believe that the proposition is true, from reasons why the proposition is true. and arguments can do both of those things. So, we need a somewhat broader definition of argument to cover these different kinds of reasons.
Play video starting at :6:26 and follow transcript6:26
We'll think of an argument as a connected series of sentences or statements or propositions, where some of these sentences or statements or propositions or premises and one of them is the conclusion and the one's that are premises are intended to provide some kind of reason for the one that's the conclusion. This definition is useful in many ways. First of all, it tells us what the parts of the arguments are, the premises and the conclusion. Secondly, it tells you what the argument's made of. It's made up of language because sentences and statements and propositions are made in language.
Play video starting at :7:9 and follow transcript7:09
Third, it tells you the purpose of argument, to give a reason for the conclusion.
Play video starting at :7:16 and follow transcript7:16
Fourth, a nice feature is that it's very flexible because there are lots of different kinds of reasons. We don't want our definition to be too narrow because then it won't cover all the different kinds of arguments, and the notion of reason captures the different kinds of relations between the premises and the conclusion in different kinds of arguments.
Play video starting at :7:37 and follow transcript7:37
So let's do a few quick exercises to make sure that you understand how this definition works.

# Are arguments used for justification
Welcome back. In the previous lecture, we saw a definition of argument as a connected series of sentences, statements or propositions. Where some of those sentences, statements, propositions are premises and one of them is a conclusion. And the premises are intended to give some kind of reason for the conclusion. In this lecture we're going to look at the purposes for, which people give arguments because the purposes are crucial in determining what an object is. Take for example an artifact that you might find in an archeological site. You won't be able to figure out whether it's a really big screwdriver or a really small spatula unless you know whether the people who used it intended it to screw screws or to pick up food that they were cooking.
Play video starting at ::57 and follow transcript0:57
So, to understand arguments we need to understand the purposes for arguments. And that means, why does somebody bother to give an argument instead of just asserting the conclusion without an argument? Well, just think about it. If you went to a used car lot and the salesman said, you ought to buy that Mustang.
Play video starting at :1:16 and follow transcript1:16
Would that convince you? Not a chance. But if the salesman said you ought to buy that Mustang because it looks really cool and it goes really fast. Or maybe it has great gas mileage or whatever, and gives you a series of reasons, then you might be convinced to buy the Mustang. So, that's one purpose of arguments to try to convince you to do things or believe things that you wouldn't otherwise do or believe. So, this purpose is persuading or convincing. And if you think about it what the salesman's trying to do is he's trying to change your mental states. He's trying to make you believe something that you didn't believe or do something that you didn't do. So he's trying to bring about an effect in the world.
Play video starting at :2:6 and follow transcript2:06
But that's just one purpose of arguments. We don't always act like salesmen. Sometimes, instead of trying to change people's beliefs, we're simply trying to give them a reason for their belief or for our belief.
Play video starting at :2:20 and follow transcript2:20
And to give them a reason is not necessarily to convince them or persuade them or change their beliefs.
Play video starting at :2:28 and follow transcript2:28
When we're simply trying to give them a reason to believe the conclusion we're going to call that justification. So, imagine that your friend, you're not a salesman, you're a friend, imagine that your friend is thinking about buying a car. He doesn't know which one to buy. You might say. Well, I think you ought to buy the Mustang. Because it looks really good and it goes really fast and its actually got pretty good gas mileage and its quiet reliable or whatever.
Play video starting at :2:56 and follow transcript2:56
You're not necessarily trying to convince her to buy that car. It'd be fine with you if she bought any car she wanted, any car that would make her happy. You're trying to talk about the reasons for buying the car so that you can make your own decision. And that says you're trying to justify that decision or that belief that Mustang is the best car for her to buy.
Play video starting at :3:16 and follow transcript3:16
And not necessarily to convince her or persuade her, if she comes up with great reason to the contrary you're perfect happy. Whereas the salesman wouldn't be.
Play video starting at :3:28 and follow transcript3:28
But notice, that you might give exactly the same reasons that the salesman did. Exactly the same argument that the salesman did. The difference lies in the purpose because the salesman is trying to convince her to change her beliefs and actions, but your goal with your friend is to discuss the reasons for her decision or action. So, you're thinking about justification and the salesman was thinking about persuasion. Now, it really matters whether your goal is justification or persuasion because there's a big difference here.
Play video starting at :3:58 and follow transcript3:58
If you're trying to justify your friend's belief or your friend's action. Then you try to give her good reasons, the salesman can convince her or persuade her with bad reasons. So, it doesn't matter to his purposes whether the arguments that he gives are any good or bad, as long as they work to affect that change in the world. Whereas you care about whether your arguments and your reasons are good reasons or arguments because, you're trying to justify that belief or that action.
Play video starting at :4:30 and follow transcript4:30
And ,of course, people can try to do all of these things at once. They can mix them together in various ways. And that can get complicated. So, when someone gives you an argument, you need to ask a series of questions. The first thing you need to ask is, is this person trying to change my mind? Or change my behavior? If so, then their goal is persuasion or to convince you.
Play video starting at :4:58 and follow transcript4:58
Then you need to ask, are they trying to give reasons to change my mind? Or for believing, if I already believed it. Well, if they're doing that then their goal is justification. And if you go down that series of questions you'll be able to understand what the purpose of giving the argument is, at least for this range of cases. So, let's do a few exercises just to make sure that you understand justification before we go on to the next purpose of argument, which will be explanation.

# Strong Arguments Don't Always Persuade Everyone
Hi again. In a previous offering of this course, one student made a great point about persuasion and justification and the relation between those two. She did it in an argument that she presented for the entire class and I think we can all learn by listening to her. So here it is. Strong arguments don't always persuade everyone by Jessica Hyde from the United Kingdom.
Play video starting at ::29 and follow transcript0:29
It's not enough for an argument to be strong, valid and sound to be persuasive. You can have an argument for which every premise is genuinely true, and where every conceivable flaw in the argument is negated and still, not have it be persuasive.
Play video starting at ::48 and follow transcript0:48
There will almost always be someone who either misunderstands the argument, or blindly believes the opposite of a premise, in face of facts. Human beings aren't always logical and don't always believe scientifically proven cause and effect. Religious and cultural beliefs can be too hard to overcome.
Play video starting at :1:8 and follow transcript1:08
So even the best arguments can have disbelievers.
Play video starting at :1:15 and follow transcript1:15
Thank you, Jessica. What a great argument. I'm convinced. Remember, to persuade someone is to convince them or change their mind into believing what you wanted them to believe, and what you were trying to get them to believe. Whereas justifying, is giving them a reason to believe your conclusion.
Play video starting at :1:37 and follow transcript1:37
And those are different. Because, as Jessica argues very well, sometimes people make mistakes. You give a perfectly good argument with perfectly good premises and it's formulated as clearly as could ever be expected. And yet, they don't understand it, or they don't believe your premises. And so they're not persuaded. But still you did give a good argument. So you succeeded in justifying your belief, but was it a good argument if you were trying to persuade them? Well maybe not. If your purpose was to persuade them then It might matter to you that you didn't persuade them. Whereas, if your purpose was to justify the conclusion, to give a reason to believe it, then you did succeed, in that purpose. So, whether you see it as a good argument or not, is going to depend a lot, on what your purpose is. As Jessica points out, sometimes you're going to want to persuade, and it's not always going to be easy to turn an argument that justifies and gives a good reason into one that persuades. That is going to depend on making sure that they do accept your premises, and that they do understand your arguments. And that's yet another trick that we haven't discussed perhaps as much as we should have. And, we learn another lesson from one of the student comments on Jessica's argument. Here it is, from Judith, I think Jessica has opened a very interesting discussion with her argument. Thank you Jessica, I appreciate that, we do too.
Play video starting at :3:17 and follow transcript3:17
When I'm learning, is the purpose of an argument is to state with clarity, and some degree of certainty, an opinion or point of view; a valid, strong and sound argument in it of itself may never persuade or convert anyone to adopt a different way of thinking. So what. What a strong argument does is communicate clearly what one thinks and why they think it. So I guess the benchmark of success for many arguments is not complete persuasion, but is how clearly one is understood. If someone's intent is to blindly refute everything, that's not an intellectually honest engagement. I've found that in construction better, more thoughtful arguments people may not agree with me, but they're far more considerate of what I have to say. And by using much of what we're learning, I'm listening much more intently to other views. Yes, Jessica, many things do defy logic. We just keep trying to do our best. Thank you Judith. What a great point. Because what you've done is you've shown us that there are other goals of arguments in addition to persuasion and justification. One you mentioned was understanding. Sometimes the point of an argument is not to bring other people over to your point of view.
Play video starting at :4:37 and follow transcript4:37
But just to make them understand why you hold the position that you do. You're trying to show them your reasons even if you know that those reasons are not reasons that they, themselves, are going to accept.
Play video starting at :4:51 and follow transcript4:51
Well, why would you want to do that?
Play video starting at :4:54 and follow transcript4:54
As you say Because it makes them more considerate of what you believe and of you. Because if we understand each other and the reasons why we hold our positions, we'll respect each other more and be more considerate. Not always. Of course there are going to be exceptions. But as a general trend, we're going to get along with each other much better if we understand why we disagree and what reasons we have.
Play video starting at :5:24 and follow transcript5:24
The example where this is not working is politics. Everybody knows that politicians just yell at each other and don't really listen to each other. They just scream out what's going to appeal to their base without thinking about what the real reasons are for the positions they're holding.
Play video starting at :5:42 and follow transcript5:42
I think they'd be a lot better off, and we'd be a lot better off, if they were to take Judith's lesson and say, give us the reason so we can understand why you're adopting that position. We'll give you our reasons so you can understand why we're adopting our position. And then we can seek a compromise by satisfying the values that we both are most concerned about. And arguments can play a role then, in helping us cooperate with each other and live with each other and compromise on the very important issues that we all face. Another lesson that Jessica and Judith have taught us, is don't set your sights too high.
Play video starting at :6:25 and follow transcript6:25
If your goal is to persuade everybody, you're going to be constantly frustrated. Because there's always going to be people out there who, don't understand your argument. Or who, understand it, but are obstinate, and refuse to accept your premise, no matter how well you argue for it.
Play video starting at :6:46 and follow transcript6:46
So, if you try to convince everybody, you're not going to succeed.
Play video starting at :6:52 and follow transcript6:52
So give it up. You can't convince or persuade everyone. Still you can accomplish a lot. You can help them understand you,you can come to understand them and you can give them good reasons to believe your conclusion. Well, that's a lot, and that can be very important, even if they're not persuaded. And you, if you're justified to believing your conclusion can have reason to believe that the fault lies with them, not with you, when they don't accept your conclusion.
Play video starting at :7:35 and follow transcript7:35
Course you probably can't convince them of that. You can't convince them that the fault lies with them, not with you. But still, you might have accomplished your goals if your goals are reasonable. Namely, to increase understanding, to find the reasons for your belief, and to present those reasons and ways that people ought to understand and accept.
Play video starting at :7:59 and follow transcript7:59
That's what justification is and that's what understanding is, and those can be extremely valuable in arguments even if there's still some people out there who aren't persuaded.

# What are arguments made of
Last time we discussed what arguments are for, their purposes. We saw that arguments have at least three purposes. Namely, persuasion, justification, and explanation. We also saw that one way to explain something is to cite its purpose. So we can understand why Joe went to the store by seeing that he went to the store because he wanted some milk. So his purpose was to get milk. Similarly, we can understand arguments by looking at their purposes. And that's what we did last time. But this time we're looking at a different kind of explanation. And as we saw, one way to explain things is to look at the material. So you want to understand why a MacBook Air is so light? The answer is, it's made out of aluminum.
Play video starting at ::47 and follow transcript0:47
Similarly, if we want to understand arguments, we're going to gain understanding by looking carefully at the material that they're made out of. And we saw that arguments are sets of sentences, statements and propositions, so that means they're made out of language. So in this lecture and the next few, we're going to look at the nature of language in order to better understand arguments. So, if we know that arguments are made out of language, we know that the only creatures who can give arguments are ones that can use language. Now some people think that other animals can use language and there's a minimal kind of language that other animals can use. But other animals cannot use language that's complex enough to make arguments. It might seem that there's some exceptions, here's one possibility. [FOREIGN]. But no matter what it sounds like, this goat is not really arguing. Maybe he's fighting. Maybe he's fending off what he takes to be an enemy. But he's not arguing. So if other animals can use language, we can't define humans as the animal that talks, but we can define humans as the animal that argues. Or as Aristotle said the rational animal, the animal that reasons because other animals don't do that. Humans are the only one that argues and reasons in this sense.
Play video starting at :2:19 and follow transcript2:19
So, we could understand humans and arguments better if we understand language better. Now I can't tell you everything that needs to be said about language, you'd need to take a linguistics course for that and I recommend that you try one because it's very interesting. But here I'm only going to be able to make four basic points about language. First of all, language is important. Second, it's conventional. Third, it's representational, and fourth, it's social. That should at least get us going in understanding what arguments are made of. First, language is important. It would be extremely difficult to live life without language. Just try to imagine. What it would be like. It's really hard to imagine, but think about someone like Helen Keller. Who was born able to see and hear, but very shortly thereafter, lost her ability to see and hear.
Play video starting at :3:16 and follow transcript3:16
It was only much later in life that she gained the ability to use language because she never had that in her early years. And when she gained that ability, she was amazed. [SOUND]. >> W-A-T-E-R, water. It has a name. W-A-T. [SOUND] >> When Helen Keller gained the ability to use language, and to communicate. she didn't become able to see or hear, she still couldn't see or hear but she could do amazing things. She went around the country giving presentations, she graduated from Radcliff College. All of that was made available to her simply by adding language and communication to her life. So language is extremely useful. And that explains why it's all around us. Just imagine walking down the streets of a city, and all the signs that you'd see. You'd just see words here, there, and everywhere.
Play video starting at :4:18 and follow transcript4:18
And now we have a mystery. If we're not paying attention to language, then how can we use it so well to achieve so many purposes? And the answer to that lies in the second general feature of language that I want to talk about. Namely, language is conventional. But what's a convention?
Play video starting at :4:37 and follow transcript4:37
Remember that in the United States people drive on the right hand side of the road. That's our convention.
Play video starting at :4:43 and follow transcript4:43
But what does that mean? It means that there's a general pattern of behavior That most people throughout society obey on a regular basis and they criticize people who deviate from that pattern. And the same applies to language. We have certain patterns of using words in certain ways and when people deviate from those patterns, we criticize them. We say they're misspeaking or it's ungrammatical. Of course, conventions can vary. Everybody knows that there are many countries around the world where people don't drive on the right hand side of the road, they drive on the left hand side of the road. The United Kingdom's one of them, but there are lots more.
Play video starting at :5:21 and follow transcript5:21
And the same applies to language. You could have the same word that's used to mean very different things in different languages. Most notorious example is football. In the United States, it's used to refer to American football.
Play video starting at :5:35 and follow transcript5:35
Whereas, in the rest of the world it is used to refer to what Americans call soccer. And people in the rest of the world think that America is kind of silly because you don't use your feet on the ball except for punting and place kicking in football. But whether it makes sense or not, the point here is simply that the conventions can vary from one part of the world to the other. And of course you can do that with any word, you could, in English use the word money to refer to socks. at least the English language could've done that, it didn't but it could have. So in this way, conventions seem to be kind of arbitrary, it could've been very different. But language is far from completely arbitrary, because the conventions of language have limits. And two of these limits that I want to emphasize come from the fact that language is also representational and social. So first, language is representational.
Play video starting at :6:34 and follow transcript6:34
When we use language we're often trying to refer to objects in the world and describe facts in the world. And you can't change those objects or those facts merely by changing your language.
Play video starting at :6:45 and follow transcript6:45
One good story to illustrate this is about the young Lincoln. When he was a lawyer, he supposedly examined a witness during a trial and he said, okay how many legs does a horse have? And the witness said four.
Play video starting at :7: and follow transcript7:00
And then Lincoln said, well if we call a tail a leg. Then how many legs does a horse have? And the witness said, well, then, I suppose the horse would have five legs. And Lincoln said absolutely not, that's wrong. Calling a tail a leg doesn't make it a leg. And the point of the story, whether it's true historically or not, is that language cannot change the facts of the world. It can't make horses have five legs if you merely change your language. Here's another example, suppose that you don't have much money but you happen to have a lot of socks in your drawer.
Play video starting at :7:40 and follow transcript7:40
Well, you could say, I'm going to use the word money to refer to socks, and now all of a sudden, I've got lots of money. I'm not poor anymore. It ain't going to work. And that's because language, again, can't change your financial situation because that's a fact about the world, not about how you're using the word socks, or the word money. And the other limit on the conventions of language, comes from the fact that language is social. Sure, sometimes we talk to ourselves and use language to write things down. Write notes to ourselves, for example, without other people around. But basically language evolved because of its social function. And what that means is that there's a point in following the conventions of the language. as shared by the rest of the society that speaks that language. You know, I've always thought that it was kind of silly that grapefruits are called grapefruits. Sure they're fruits, but they don't look like grapes at all. They look more like lemons. They're like really big lemons and that's why I think they ought to be called mega lemons.
Play video starting at :8:54 and follow transcript8:54
But if I went to a restaurant and I wanted to order grapefruit juice, so I'd turn to the the service person and said I'd like some mega lemon juice, I probably wouldn't get what I wanted. And so even if I think the language is not using the right conventions, there's a point in following the conventions of the language in order to be able to communicate with other people and get what I want. And again, the great philosophers Monty Python saw this very well when they produced their little clip called, The Man Who Speaks Only in Anagrams. >> Our first guest in the studio tonight is a man who talks entirely in anagrams. >> [UNKNOWN]. >> Do you enjoy this? >> I stom certainly od. Revy chum so. >> And, what's your name? >> Hamrag. Hamrag Yatlerot. >> So, the point is obvious. Namely, language is shared. And once it's shared, then it makes sense to actually follow the conventions of society even if you don't like them. Overall then, language is important and it's conventional in ways that might seem arbitrary but actually is limited in important ways by the fact that language is also representational and social. But it's kind of cheap to say language is conventional. Which are the conventions? Which are the rules that language follows? And this is actually extremely complex because language follows rules or conventions at many different levels. Just take a real simple example, you walk into a pizza shop and you say give me pepperoni.
Play video starting at :10:31 and follow transcript10:31
Well the person then fixes a pepperoni pizza and you pay for it. But how did that work, that you said give me pepperoni? Well, first of all notice that you had to use words that were meaningful to the person you were speaking to. Gimme wasn't a word in English a long time ago, but this person understands gimme as a word, and therefore they can understand it. But in addition to those semantic constraints. You also have to have physical production constraints. You have to say it loud enough. If the pizza shop is really noisy, then you have to speak pretty loudly to get the person behind the counter to understand what you're saying. You also have to put the words in the right order. If instead of saying, gimme a pepperoni pizza, you said pizza a gimme pepperoni. They might not understand at all what you're saying. So there are structural combination rules that you have to follow as well. And there are also etiquette rules. In some pizza places if you just said, gimme pepperoni, the waiter might say, well, forget it sir. I don't serve such impolite people. I certainly would say that to my son if my son said, give me pepperoni. I wouldn't get him a pizza. I'd say you need to ask me properly. so rules of etiquette can also get in the way of communication and cooperation. So language operates at all of these levels. Physical production, semantics are the meanings of words, syntax are the rules of grammar and etiquette.
Play video starting at :12:4 and follow transcript12:04
Now all of this might seem obvious to you and, and probably should be obvious to you. but the rules of the language are not always obvious and that's what we're going to be learning throughout this course. I'll start with a simple example what's this? Well, that is a finger. Okay? But what's this? Haaaaaaa. That is a singer. This is not a finger. Haaaaaaa. And that's not a singer. Why do we pronounce the words finger with a hard g and the word singer with a soft g. That's a rule that we all follow, but
Play video starting at :12:43 and follow transcript12:43
very few people know the rule behind that pronunciation. So, do you know the rule? Take a little while and think about it. Have you got it yet? Okay, I'll tell you the answer. When a word ends in nger and is derived from a verb that ends in ng then you get a soft g like singer. But when the word that ends in nger is not derived from a verb that ends in ng then you get either a hard g like finger or a kind of medium g like plunger or danger.
Play video starting at :13:34 and follow transcript13:34
Now, when do you get that medium g or that hard g? That's a trickier question. I don't know the answer to that one, which shows that we can all use language according to rules without knowing what the rules are. We don't have to be conscious of the rules at all. And a lot of what we're going to be doing in this course, is looking behind our language to try to figure out the rules that govern the way we use language, especially when we're making arguments in order to better understand what we're doing. Some of the answers we give will be obvious, once you mention them, but I bet you hadn't thought of them before.

# meanings
The rules that we've looked at so far apply to every use of language. But we want to focus on those rules that are important specifically to arguments. At least normally, misspelling or mispronouncing a word doesn't affect an argument. Of course, if you pronounce one word so that it sounds like another word, it can be very confusing and people won't understand you. Or if you misspell it so badly they don't know what word you wanted, the argument is not going to work. But normally misspelling and mispronunciation don't make the argument bad. Instead, what affects the argument is what's going to affect the proposition that's getting expressed. The meaning of the sentence, because that's going to affect whether the premises justify the conclusion or whether they explain the conclusion. and so, we need to focus on those rules of language that in particular deal with the meanings of words and of sentences.
Play video starting at :1:2 and follow transcript1:02
So what's meaning? Well, one thing I can tell you is we're not going to be talking about the meaning of life in this course. The meaning of life is a totally different topic. We're also not going to be talking about whether clouds mean rain in the sense of giving some indication or evidence that there's going to be rain.
Play video starting at :1:19 and follow transcript1:19
We're concerned with the meanings of words and sentences in language. We're concerned with linguistic meaning in particular. So, how are we going to understand linguistic meaning? Well one way to think about the meanings of words and sentences is to ask how you would explain them to someone who doesn't understand them, like a small child or someone who doesn't speak this language.
Play video starting at :1:42 and follow transcript1:42
Well if somebody said, what's the meaning of the word chair? You might go, well when I use the word chair, I'm referring to these things you know, something like this.
Play video starting at :1:53 and follow transcript1:53
when I say, I am sitting on the chair, what I mean is my body is above the chair. And so, that approach to teaching language suggests to many people that what words mean is the same as what they refer to.
Play video starting at :2:10 and follow transcript2:10
and what sentences mean are the facts that they try to describe. Now that view of language is often called the referential or descriptive view of language. So is this referential or descriptive theory adequate? No, no, no, no! Absolutely not!
Play video starting at :2:27 and follow transcript2:27
That theory does not cover a lot of language that's extremely important. Just think about greeting someone in the morning. Hello! Are you referring to an object when you say, hello?
Play video starting at :2:41 and follow transcript2:41
Or think about the word not in a, in a sentence, and that the word not is going to be crucial to arguments, but does the word not refer to something separate from the other things? Well, if it did, then there would be more objects in the room when I'm not sitting on the chair than when I am sitting on the chair.
Play video starting at :2:59 and follow transcript2:59
So you cannot understand the meanings of many words, like hello or not or for that matter, am or sitting. Many words don't fit this referential or descriptive theory of meaning. So, if meaning is not referential description, what is it? Well here we're going to take our cue from Ludwig Wittgenstein, the great 20th century Austrian philosopher, who argued that meaning is use. If you want to understand the meaning of the word hello, you don't look for some object that it refers to, you ask how is it used and the answer is obvious, it's used to greet people.
Play video starting at :3:37 and follow transcript3:37
If you want to understand the meaning of the question, where's the library? The answer is, well, that question is used to inquire about the library, to ask where the library is. If you want to understand the meaning of an imperative like, gimme a pizza. Then that is a way of ordering a pizza. You're using that phrase to order a pizza. So the meaning of the phrase is given by the way those words are used in normal situations by competent speakers of the language. Now, this point about meaning being used is very important to the language of argument.
Play video starting at :4:15 and follow transcript4:15
As we saw the word not does not refer to an additional object and the same goes for the word and. When you say, I am sitting in the chair and I am in the office, the word and doesn't refer to an object either. So if we want to understand what the word and is used to do then we have to think about what people do with it. And what they do is they conjoint different sentences. They don't add an extra object or an extra fact, they just conjoin sentences and form a whole sentence out of two parts, each of which was a sentence to begin with. Of course, the word and is not always used to conjoin sentences. We can say things like Roberto and Olivia went to Sao Paulo together. And Roberto's not a sentence, Olivia's not a sentence, they're people, not sentences. And there weren't three things that went to Sao Paulo together. Roberto, Olivia, and this third thing and, whatever that is. Still, the word and is used to conjoin. In this case, it's used to conjoin things or people. In the previous examples it was used to join, conjoin sentences. But if we want to know what the word and means, we shouldn't be looking for some object that it refers to. Instead, we should be describing how it's used and what it's used to do. Namely, it's used to conjoin. And when we look more closely at the uses of language, we see that language is used in a lot of different ways. Use is diverse. Just take a simple example. I'd like to give you a little piece of personal advice. You ought to floss your teeth every day.
Play video starting at :6:6 and follow transcript6:06
So what did I just do? I uttered a bunch of words. I made physical motion in the air. But in addition, those words were meaningful, you ought to floss your teeth every day. Each of those words is meaningful in the language, and I put them together in an order that was grammatical, so the whole thing makes sense. When you make a meaningful utterance like that, we're going to say you perform a linguistic act and there's a linguistic level of the use of language that we will study in one lecture, the next lecture. But in addition, when I said you ought to floss your teeth every day, I also gave you a piece of friendly advice. I advised you. And notice that, even if you don't follow my advice, I still advised you. And, if you don't follow my advice and your teeth rot out, then I can say, look, you should've listened to me. because I advised you to floss your teeth every day. So, the speech act level occurs even when it doesn't affect your actions at all. That's the second level of use of language, the speech act level, and we'll talk about that in more detail two lectures from now. The third level of language has to do with the production of certain effects. Maybe when I say, you ought to floss your teeth everyday, I persuade you. And what that means is I bring about a certain effect on your behavior or your thought or your attitudes.
Play video starting at :7:36 and follow transcript7:36
Well, that's what we're going to call the conversational level. And conversational acts are the acts of bringing about those effects and persuasion is one example.
Play video starting at :7:47 and follow transcript7:47
So now we have three levels of language. We have the linguistic level, which is the meaningful utterance, producing a meaningful utterance. We have the speech act level. Advising is a nice paradigm of that, which can be accomplished even if you're not persuaded. And we have persuading you, which is the conversational level. So there's the linguistic level, the speech act level, and the conversational level. And each of these levels will be explored in more detail in one of the next three lectures. But here's a little warning. And you have a choice. The material in the next three lectures is a little bit more abstract and difficult than some of the things we've been through so far. Now I think it's fascinating. We're going to try to make it fun. And it's really important to understand how your language works. But it's not absolutely essential to the things that we're going to cover in the rest of this course. So it's up to you. You can listen to these three lectures if you want and there will be some exercises throughout those lectures that will test your understanding, but none of that material's going to be on the quiz. So you can listen to the next three lectures, and I hope you do, and I hope you enjoy them, but you don't have to in order to be able to go through the rest of the course and do well on the quiz at the end of this part.

# linguistic acts
So as we saw last time there are three distinct levels of language: linguistic level, the speech level, and the conversational level. And all of these levels of meaning affect arguments. So in the next three lectures we want to work through these levels one by one. And this lecture is going to deal in particular with the linguistic level of language, which is simply the production of a meaningful utterance. So in order to perform a linguistic act, all you have to do is utter a set of words that are meaningful. That fit together according to the semantics. That is, the meanings of particular words. And the syntax or the grammar of the language in general. For example, it's easy. It's easy is a linguistic act. Because it's as a contraction, you're allowed to contract it and is according to the rules of English. And easy is a word, so, it's easy, follows the semantics, and the syntax of the language of English. That's all there is to it. Now although linguistic acts are really simple, they do require some special components that are worth separating out,
Play video starting at :1:12 and follow transcript1:12
for example, they require meaningful words. When you simply hum a tune like [MUSIC],
Play video starting at :1:22 and follow transcript1:22
then you're not performing a linguistic act. Because there are no meaningful words in it. But when you sing a song, [MUSIC]. I love Miranda and Nicholas too. Then, you are performing a linguistic act, because you uttered words that were meaningful when they were put together in that way. And I've been taking this for granted, but of course, the words you utter have to be meaningful. it's not going to be a linguistic act if you utter, a, what looks like a sentence. Namely, a set of sounds. That look like words if they're not really words. So if you say, twas brillig and the slithy toves did grye and gimble in the wabe. And so on from Louis Carroll's famous Jabberwocky poem. Then it's not going to be a linguistic act, if those words are not meaningful words in any language. And you can also get nonsense when you take words that have meanings and put them together in an order that doesn't make any sense.
Play video starting at :2:24 and follow transcript2:24
My dog has fleas makes sense but dog fleas my has doesn't make any sense. So meaningful words with the wrong grammatical structure won't work and Noam Chomsky from MIT taught us that you can also get nonsense when you take words that make sense and you put them together with the right grammatical structure, but they still don't fit together because of the relation between the meanings.
Play video starting at :2:56 and follow transcript2:56
His example here was colorless green ideas sleep furiously. What does that mean? Colorless green ideas sleep furiously? Well colorless makes sense; green that's a word, ideas, sleep, furiously. Each of those words makes sense and they're each in their appropriate grammatical role, but altogether it doesn't make any sense. So they're lots of ways you can get nonsense in language. And when you do, you're not performing a linguistic act. You know there's some really fun examples where it's not clear whether or not the utterance is meaningful. Now, some of these examples, among my favorites are garden path sentences. Here's one. The man who whistles tunes pianos. Wait a minute. What does that mean? If you think of it as the man who whistles tunes is one unit, then you don't understand what the word pianos is doing, because the man who whistles tunes sounds like a reference to a particular man, and pianos is not a verb.
Play video starting at :4:5 and follow transcript4:05
But if you think of it as the man who whistles is one unit
Play video starting at :4:10 and follow transcript4:10
and the second unit is tunes pianos, so it's the man who whistles tunes pianos. Then it makes sense, because it's the man who's whistling also tunes pianos.
Play video starting at :4:21 and follow transcript4:21
So you have to be able to carve the set of words up into the right units and see what grammatical structure they have in order to understand the sentence. because tunes can either be a verb, which tells you what the man is doing to the pianos, or it can be a noun which refers to the thing that the man is whistling. And you have to get those grammatical categories straight and the garden path sentences lead you astray and make you think of it in the wrong way and there'll be some more examples of that in the exercises.
Play video starting at :4:51 and follow transcript4:51
But my favorite example of all is buffalo, buffalo, buffalo. What does that mean? Well buffalo are American bison, okay. But buffalo, the word buffalo in English that is, can also be used as a verb to refer to tricking or fooling someone. So you can have buffalo, American bison, buffaloing, that is tricking or fooling, buffalo, American bison. Buffalo buffalo buffalo. But you can go even further, because there's a city in New York named Buffalo, and of course, there can be buffalo, that is American bison, from the city of Buffalo, New York and they're called Buffalo, buffalo. And when they trick or fool other bi, American bison from Buffalo New York, then you have Buffalo, buffalo, buffalo, buffalo, buffalo.
Play video starting at :5:43 and follow transcript5:43
Or buffalo, buffalo, buffalo, buffalo, buffalo. Which doesn't sound like a meaningful utterance, but it is. And you can go even further, you can actually build it out to 11 straight utterances of the word buffalo. Buffalo, buffalo, buffalo, buffalo, buffalo, buffalo, buffalo, buffalo, buffalo, buffalo, buffalo. Now, tell me what that means. I'm not going to explain it to you, because it takes a while to explain it. But If you think about it, you might be able to figure it out. And even if you can't figure out eleven buffalos in a row, the point still holds, because the point's just that sometimes what doesn't seem meaningful turns out to be meaningful, and if you're careful and, and charitable, and do your best to interpret what it really means, then you might be able to make sense out of some utterances that don't seem to make sense at first. And then when you can makes sense out of them, then they're linguistic acts. For now, I don't have time to go into any detail on semantics or syntax, although we will discuss some details when we discuss vagueness and ambiguity in the discussion of fallacies later in this course. But I hope that the linguistic level is pretty simple and understandable, so we can go on and look in more detail at the speech act level and the conversational act level.

# Speech acts
The second level of language that we want to discuss is speech acts. We already saw one instance in the example of advising, when I advised you to floss your teeth everyday. But clearest examples probably occurs in games and in ceremonies.
Play video starting at ::18 and follow transcript0:18
One famous incident that occurred, I believe in a Yankees game, was when a batter had two strikes and three balls and the pitcher threw the ball near the strike zone, and the batter didn't swing, so the umpire didn't say anything. And the batter turned to the umpire and said, well ump, am I out or was that a walk? And the umpire said, you ain't nothing till I say so. And that's the lesson of speech acts. With a speech act the saying so that makes you so. And the rules of baseball mean that you're out and it was a strike if the umpire says so, but you walk and it was a ball if the umpire says so. Now, maybe the umpire should have called a ball when he called strike or should have called a strike when he called a ball, but it doesn't matter because he makes a mistake and calls it a strike and you're out. So the next kind of example involves ceremonies. Imagine that you're at traditional marriage ceremony and the bride and the groom show up with an officiant in an appropriate location and the officiant says to the man, do you take this woman to be your lawfully wedded wife? And he says, I do. Then the officiant turns to the bride and says, do you take this man to be your lawfully wedded husband? And she says, I do. Then the officiant says, I now pronounce you husband and wife. That's pretty cool. By uttering those words, he made them husband and wife. The words changed their relationship in a legal way, in a religious word and in a personal way. All of that happened just by uttering words.
Play video starting at :1:56 and follow transcript1:56
And notice also that you can use a special little word to explain this. You can say that, he thereby pronounced them husband and wife. By uttering the words, I now pronounce you husband and wife, he thereby pronounced them husband and wife because it was right then and there in those words, by means of those words, that he made them husband and wife.
Play video starting at :2:20 and follow transcript2:20
These words provide us with a nice general test called the thereby test.
Play video starting at :2:26 and follow transcript2:26
Here's a certain pattern of words. If I say, I blank, then I thereby blank. I blank by means of saying I blank.
Play video starting at :2:37 and follow transcript2:37
Now sometimes filling in that blank with some words will make sense, but it won't make sense with other words, and that will provide a test because when you can fill in that blank with a verb and it makes sense, then that verb names a speech act. So for example, if I say, I now pronounce you man and wife, then I thereby pronounce you man and wife. My speech act is pronouncing you. And if I say, I apologize I thereby apologize.
Play video starting at :3:10 and follow transcript3:10
Notice that what the formula does is it takes you from the words, which are in quotation marks in the if clause of the thereby test to the world, because when it's not inside quotation marks on the right side of the thereby test it refers to the world. So when it's in quotation marks it's about the words and when it's not in quotation marks on the right side it refers to the world and the formula takes you from the words to the world. And that's what's tricky about it. It's amazing that you can actually use your words to change the world, but only in the special case of speech acts. Of course all of this works only in the right circumstances. You can't just randomly walk up to any couple on the street and say, I now pronounce you husband and wife. Just try it. >> Excuse me, I wanted to say something. I now pronounce you husband and wife. >> Thank you. [LAUGH] >> Whoa, I'm lucky they didn't hit me. You obviously cannot pronounce people husband and wife if you're not an officiant, they're not a bride and a groom who have said, I do. It has to occur in the right circumstances.
Play video starting at :4:29 and follow transcript4:29
And sometimes, which circumstances are the right circumstances will be very controversial.
Play video starting at :4:36 and follow transcript4:36
People argue about whether a man can marry man or a woman can marry a woman.
Play video starting at :4:42 and follow transcript4:42
The ones who think that you can't, think that marriage has, as part of its appropriate circumstances, that only people of different genders can get married. A man can marry a woman, but can't marry another man. Whereas, other people think that a man can marry a man and a woman can marry a woman. So it's going to be controversial which circumstances are appropriate for a marriage ceremony, but everybody agrees that you can't just do it randomly to any old couple on the street. So everybody agrees that there are going to be limits and that the speech act works only in the appropriate circumstances and we can build that into the thereby test by just adding a few words. If I say, I blank in the appropriate circumstances, then I thereby blank. But it's only in the appropriate circumstances that you can perform this speech act by uttering the words.
Play video starting at :5:40 and follow transcript5:40
Now we can use the thereby test to pick out speech acts because it works for a lot of different examples. If I say, I promise to meet you for lunch tomorrow in the appropriate circumstances that I thereby promise to meet you for lunch tomorrow.
Play video starting at :5:56 and follow transcript5:56
So promising is a speech act. If I say, I thank you for inviting me to your party, and throwing such a great party by the way.
Play video starting at :6:5 and follow transcript6:05
Then I do thereby thank you for inviting me to your party and for throwing such a good party by the way.
Play video starting at :6:12 and follow transcript6:12
So thanking is a speech act. If I say, I apologize for tripping over your legs, then I thereby apologize for tripping over your legs. Notice that the circumstances matter in all these cases. If I say I apologize, I mean, I don't really feel sorry then, I did apologize, but it was an insincere apology because the circumstances weren't right since I didn't have the appropriate feelings. But, I still did apologize. Now, in contrast, whether I promise you or threaten you, depends on whether the thing that I promise or threaten to do is something that you want. If you want me to do it, then I'm promising. But if you don't want me to do it, then I might be threatening. So your attitudes towards the thing that I'm going to do determines whether my speech act is a promise or a threat. In all of these cases, the circumstances are going to matter. So in that example the circumstances affect which speech act I'm going to perform. But in other cases the circumstances affect whether I really perform any speech act at all or fail to perform the speech act that I was trying to. Here's an example on that. If I say to you, I bet you that Duke will win the next National Championship and I think Ron Netta might be foolish enough to take that bet. Then what if he responds by saying, no, I won't bet you. Now, have I performed a speech act of betting? No. Have I performed another speech act? Not really. What have I performed? So sometimes when the circumstances aren't right you perform a different speech act and sometimes when the circumstances aren't right you don't perform any speech act at all. It really is very sensitive to the particular circumstances in which you're speaking. But why do we care about speech acts here, when we're supposed to be studying arguments. Well that's because arguing is a speech act. You argue with language. It's one of those things that you do in using language is a certain way. You're intending to provide reasons and you're providing what you take to be a reason to justify or explain the conclusion. And justifying and explaining are other things that you do with language. Those are speech acts too. So when we're studying arguments, we're studying a particular kind of speech act and that's why it makes it important to understand speech acts because we need to view arguing in the context of these other speech acts that I've just discussed. Now there's an awful lot more to say about speech acts and I can't say it here. In these lectures I just want to give the idea in a very basic and simple way. If you want more detail, we have a more extended discussion of speech acts in the accompanying book Understanding Arguments. But just to make sure you understand the basics let's do a few exercises first and then in the next lecture we'll go on to talk about conversational acts.
Skip to Main Content SEARCH IN COURSE Search Syed Umair Ali Think Again I: How to Understand Arguments Week 1 Speech Acts Previous Next Introduction The Nature of Argument The Purposes of Arguments The Materials of Arguments Levels of Language (OPTIONAL MATERIAL) Video: VideoLinguistic Acts . Duration: 7 minutes7 min Practice Quiz: Linguistic Acts 4 questions Discussion Prompt: Share Your Thoughts: Buffalos . Duration: 10 minutes10 min Video: VideoSpeech Acts . Duration: 9 minutes9 min Practice Quiz: Speech Acts 12 questions Discussion Prompt: Share Your Thoughts: When Can We Argue? . Duration: 10 minutes10 min Video: VideoConversational Acts . Duration: 17 minutes17 min Practice Quiz: Conversational Acts 9 questions Discussion Prompt: Share Your Thoughts: Metaphor and Irony . Duration: 10 minutes10 min Discussion Prompt: Share Your Thoughts: Jokes . Duration: 10 minutes10 min Speech Acts Notes Discuss Play Video Play Volume 0:00 / 0:00 Settings Full Screen Save note Download Transcript Help Us Translate Interactive Transcript - Enable basic transcript mode by pressing the escape key You may navigate through the transcript using tab. To save a note for a section of text press CTRL + S. To expand your selection you may use CTRL + arrow key. You may contract your selection using shift + CTRL + arrow key. For screen readers that are incompatible with using arrow keys for shortcuts, you can replace them with the H J K L keys. Some screen readers may require using CTRL in conjunction with the alt key Play video starting at ::3 and follow transcript0:03 The second level of language that we want to discuss is speech acts. We already saw one instance in the example of advising, when I advised you to floss your teeth everyday. But clearest examples probably occurs in games and in ceremonies. Play video starting at ::18 and follow transcript0:18 One famous incident that occurred, I believe in a Yankees game, was when a batter had two strikes and three balls and the pitcher threw the ball near the strike zone, and the batter didn't swing, so the umpire didn't say anything. And the batter turned to the umpire and said, well ump, am I out or was that a walk? And the umpire said, you ain't nothing till I say so. And that's the lesson of speech acts. With a speech act the saying so that makes you so. And the rules of baseball mean that you're out and it was a strike if the umpire says so, but you walk and it was a ball if the umpire says so. Now, maybe the umpire should have called a ball when he called strike or should have called a strike when he called a ball, but it doesn't matter because he makes a mistake and calls it a strike and you're out. So the next kind of example involves ceremonies. Imagine that you're at traditional marriage ceremony and the bride and the groom show up with an officiant in an appropriate location and the officiant says to the man, do you take this woman to be your lawfully wedded wife? And he says, I do. Then the officiant turns to the bride and says, do you take this man to be your lawfully wedded husband? And she says, I do. Then the officiant says, I now pronounce you husband and wife. That's pretty cool. By uttering those words, he made them husband and wife. The words changed their relationship in a legal way, in a religious word and in a personal way. All of that happened just by uttering words. Play video starting at :1:56 and follow transcript1:56 And notice also that you can use a special little word to explain this. You can say that, he thereby pronounced them husband and wife. By uttering the words, I now pronounce you husband and wife, he thereby pronounced them husband and wife because it was right then and there in those words, by means of those words, that he made them husband and wife. Play video starting at :2:20 and follow transcript2:20 These words provide us with a nice general test called the thereby test. Play video starting at :2:26 and follow transcript2:26 Here's a certain pattern of words. If I say, I blank, then I thereby blank. I blank by means of saying I blank. Play video starting at :2:37 and follow transcript2:37 Now sometimes filling in that blank with some words will make sense, but it won't make sense with other words, and that will provide a test because when you can fill in that blank with a verb and it makes sense, then that verb names a speech act. So for example, if I say, I now pronounce you man and wife, then I thereby pronounce you man and wife. My speech act is pronouncing you. And if I say, I apologize I thereby apologize. Play video starting at :3:10 and follow transcript3:10 Notice that what the formula does is it takes you from the words, which are in quotation marks in the if clause of the thereby test to the world, because when it's not inside quotation marks on the right side of the thereby test it refers to the world. So when it's in quotation marks it's about the words and when it's not in quotation marks on the right side it refers to the world and the formula takes you from the words to the world. And that's what's tricky about it. It's amazing that you can actually use your words to change the world, but only in the special case of speech acts. Of course all of this works only in the right circumstances. You can't just randomly walk up to any couple on the street and say, I now pronounce you husband and wife. Just try it. >> Excuse me, I wanted to say something. I now pronounce you husband and wife. >> Thank you. [LAUGH] >> Whoa, I'm lucky they didn't hit me. You obviously cannot pronounce people husband and wife if you're not an officiant, they're not a bride and a groom who have said, I do. It has to occur in the right circumstances. Play video starting at :4:29 and follow transcript4:29 And sometimes, which circumstances are the right circumstances will be very controversial. Play video starting at :4:36 and follow transcript4:36 People argue about whether a man can marry man or a woman can marry a woman. Play video starting at :4:42 and follow transcript4:42 The ones who think that you can't, think that marriage has, as part of its appropriate circumstances, that only people of different genders can get married. A man can marry a woman, but can't marry another man. Whereas, other people think that a man can marry a man and a woman can marry a woman. So it's going to be controversial which circumstances are appropriate for a marriage ceremony, but everybody agrees that you can't just do it randomly to any old couple on the street. So everybody agrees that there are going to be limits and that the speech act works only in the appropriate circumstances and we can build that into the thereby test by just adding a few words. If I say, I blank in the appropriate circumstances, then I thereby blank. But it's only in the appropriate circumstances that you can perform this speech act by uttering the words. Play video starting at :5:40 and follow transcript5:40 Now we can use the thereby test to pick out speech acts because it works for a lot of different examples. If I say, I promise to meet you for lunch tomorrow in the appropriate circumstances that I thereby promise to meet you for lunch tomorrow. Play video starting at :5:56 and follow transcript5:56 So promising is a speech act. If I say, I thank you for inviting me to your party, and throwing such a great party by the way. Play video starting at :6:5 and follow transcript6:05 Then I do thereby thank you for inviting me to your party and for throwing such a good party by the way. Play video starting at :6:12 and follow transcript6:12 So thanking is a speech act. If I say, I apologize for tripping over your legs, then I thereby apologize for tripping over your legs. Notice that the circumstances matter in all these cases. If I say I apologize, I mean, I don't really feel sorry then, I did apologize, but it was an insincere apology because the circumstances weren't right since I didn't have the appropriate feelings. But, I still did apologize. Now, in contrast, whether I promise you or threaten you, depends on whether the thing that I promise or threaten to do is something that you want. If you want me to do it, then I'm promising. But if you don't want me to do it, then I might be threatening. So your attitudes towards the thing that I'm going to do determines whether my speech act is a promise or a threat. In all of these cases, the circumstances are going to matter. So in that example the circumstances affect which speech act I'm going to perform. But in other cases the circumstances affect whether I really perform any speech act at all or fail to perform the speech act that I was trying to. Here's an example on that. If I say to you, I bet you that Duke will win the next National Championship and I think Ron Netta might be foolish enough to take that bet. Then what if he responds by saying, no, I won't bet you. Now, have I performed a speech act of betting? No. Have I performed another speech act? Not really. What have I performed? So sometimes when the circumstances aren't right you perform a different speech act and sometimes when the circumstances aren't right you don't perform any speech act at all. It really is very sensitive to the particular circumstances in which you're speaking. But why do we care about speech acts here, when we're supposed to be studying arguments. Well that's because arguing is a speech act. You argue with language. It's one of those things that you do in using language is a certain way. You're intending to provide reasons and you're providing what you take to be a reason to justify or explain the conclusion. And justifying and explaining are other things that you do with language. Those are speech acts too. So when we're studying arguments, we're studying a particular kind of speech act and that's why it makes it important to understand speech acts because we need to view arguing in the context of these other speech acts that I've just discussed. Now there's an awful lot more to say about speech acts and I can't say it here. In these lectures I just want to give the idea in a very basic and simple way. If you want more detail, we have a more extended discussion of speech acts in the accompanying book Understanding Arguments. But just to make sure you understand the basics let's do a few exercises first and then in the next lecture we'll go on to talk about conversational acts. Like Dislike Report an issue Share : Added to Selection.

# Conversational Acts
So now we've discussed two levels of language. The linguistic level and the speech act level. In this lecture, we want to look at the third level of language. Nominally the level of conversational acts. And the basic idea is really simple. We use language to bring about a change in the world. For example, I might turn to a friend and say, could you loan me your car?
Play video starting at ::25 and follow transcript0:25
Well, what am I doing? I'm performing a speech act of requesting or asking a favor. Something like that.
Play video starting at ::32 and follow transcript0:32
But am I doing it just for its own sake? Did I ask a favor just in order to be asking a favor? Like it was fun to ask a favor? No. I was asking a favor, to bring about a certain effect. I wanted him to hand over the keys to his car so I could use it. And I wanted him to give me permission to use his car, so I could do it legally. So I'm trying to bring about a change, not only in the physical location of the keys, but also in the legal rights that I have with regard to his car. So I'm trying to bring about a change in the world. Simply by uttering those words, could you please loan me your car?
Play video starting at :1:8 and follow transcript1:08
It happens all the time. Here's another example.
Play video starting at :1:11 and follow transcript1:11
Suppose my friend is wondering whether the moon is full. And I say, the moon is full. Well am I uttering those words just to expel hot air? No. Am I uttering those words just to express my own belief? No. I'm trying to inform my friend. I'm trying to bring about a change in my friend's beliefs, and that's to bring about an effect in the world. So that's a conversational act. To bring about the effect in the world of informing my friend. Informing is a conversational act. And almost all speech acts have particular effects that are associated with them. When you ask a question, you're trying to bring about someone answering the question. When you apologize, you're trying to bring about forgiveness. When you promise somebody, you're trying to bring about the person relying on your promise in order to believe that you're going to do it. So speech acts are often associated with particular effects that the speaker intends to bring about and the bringing about of that effect is the conversational act. So if we want an official definition of a conversational act we can say that the conversational act is the bringing about of the intended effect, which is the standard effect for the kind of speech act that the speaker is performing. That's what a conversational act is. Now. Since the conversational act is the bringing about of the standard effect. The conversational act does not occur when that effect does not occur. And that find seem weird that what kind of act you perform depends on whether the effect occurs maybe several seconds, maybe even longer even longer in the future. But it's not that weird when you think about it. Because if you pull the trigger of a gun that's pointed at someone, then whether your act of pulling the trigger is an act of killing, depends on whether the person dies. And yet the person's death is something independent of it. It's an effect that occurs, maybe quite a while in the future, but your act wasn't an act of killing unless the person died. And that's the story of conversational acts. Your act is not this conversational act unless, the effect occurs. It has to be the intended effect, that's the standard effect for the kind of speech act that you're performing. So, the really tricky question is, how are we going to bring about these effects? because it's not so easy.
Play video starting at :3:36 and follow transcript3:36
Think about how other people bring about effects. Think about a baker baking a cake. Well, the baker needs to get together the right ingredients and bring them to the right place, get the right amount of ingredients. You know, if a baker fills the entire kitchen with flour, he's not going to have any room left over to bake the cake. And has to bring the right ingredients. That means, if instead of bringing flour he brings gravel, he can't bake a cake. And he has to put together those ingredients in the right way, in the right order for example. You can't mix them in the wrong order, the cake won't work out. And has to bake it for the right amount of time and so on and so on. So there're a lot of tricky rules about how to bring about the effect of a good cake. Well the same thing applies to conversational acts. They're going to be rules that have to be followed, in order to bring about the conversational act that you're trying to bring about. That is in order to have that intended effect of the speech act in the circumstances. And the same kind of rules apply to any rational person trying to pursue any goal. Whenever you want to bring about an effect, you have to follow certain general rules. And so it applies to people who are trying to bring about effects by language, that is, to people who are trying to perform conversational acts. If you want to inform someone, that is, to have an effect on their beliefs, then you need to speak in a certain way. And if you want to promise someone, that is to get them to rely on you, that's the conversational act associated with the speech act of promising. But you're not going to get them to rely on you unless you follow certain rules. And so what we need to try to understand are the rules of language that enable us to bring about these effects that are the conversational acts. Now on this question Paul Grice helps us out a lot, he's one of the great philosophers of the 20th century. And he laid out a series of rules governing conversational acts. He called them the conversational maxims. And we're going to look at them one by one. Grice focuses in on context where people are stating things and where they're cooperating with each other and trying to inform each other. He's not trying to provide a general theory so it's for statements in a cooperative context.
Play video starting at :5:51 and follow transcript5:51
So the first maxim is the rule of quantity and it basically says, don't say more than is required for the purpose that you're trying to achieve. If you say too many words the point gets lost in the words so you shouldn't say more than you need for the purpose at hand. The second part of the rule of quantity is you shouldn't say too little. Right? Because if you say too little then that's going to be misleading and it's not going to fulfill your purpose because the person that you're talking to won't have all the information that they need.
Play video starting at :6:24 and follow transcript6:24
Second rule is the rule of quality. The rule of quality says, don't say what you don't believe to be true. Don't lie. Don't mislead. Don't deceive. Right? But also this is the second part of the rule of quality. Don't say something that you lack adequate justification for. Because you shouldn't just be talking off the top of your head. With no reason to believe what you're saying. These are all pretty common sense rules, but they weren't apparent to people until Grice formulated them. The third rule is the rule of relevance and it's the toughest of all. The rule of relevance says, be relevant. Look, it's short, I'll grant you that. It's going to be easy to remember, I'll grant you that. But it really is kind of tricky to apply the rule, because you have to figure out what's relevant and we'll see some problems with that, but for now just remember that it should be obvious. When you're talking about a subject and you want to achieve a certain purpose and the person you're talking to is cooperating with you, as Grice is assuming, then you ought to be talking about things that are relevant. And if you change the subject, that's going to be very misleading. And the fourth conversational maxim is the rule of manner. It says be brief, be orderly. Avoid obscurity, and avoid ambiguity. Pretty simple, it's all about style because if you're not brief enough, people won't pay attention to you. If it's not orderly people will get confused by that, and if you're ambiguous or obscure then people won't understand what you're saying. So these four rules are followed by speakers when they're cooperating with each other. When people aren't cooperating, they're trying to trick or deceive each other, they might violate these rules, and mislead people by abusing these rules. But when they're cooperating, these are the rules they follow and that makes them able to deceive people by violating them. And also notice that these rules might not be completely clear to you. You might not have ever thought of them before, but now that you mention them they probably seem pretty obvious. It's kind of like the finger and singer rule that we saw before regarding pronunciation. That's a rule that you hadn't thought of before but once it's pointed out it seems kind of obvious. Well that's what Grice has done. But he's shown us the rules governing conversational acts that enable us to bring about certain effects by language. Now we can use these rules to understand what's going on in a lot of conversations. Imagine you're at a restaurant and the waiter walks up to your table and says, well for dessert you can have cake or ice cream.
Play video starting at :9: and follow transcript9:00
Well. What has that waiter suggested? He's suggested that that's all you can have cake, ice cream. Well he didn't mention pie so you can't have pie. Because if he's a good waiter and he knows that they have pie back there and you can order it, then he ought to be telling you about the pie. He would be violating the rule of quantity, that is not providing you all the relevant information, if he said you can have cake or ice cream and you can also have pie but he didn't mention pie. So because you assume that he's cooperating with you and trying to get you what you want to eat, since he is your waiter, after all, there must not be pie available. So you say, I'll take ice cream, even though you would have preferred pie.
Play video starting at :9:46 and follow transcript9:46
What's happening here is called conversational implication. When the waiter said you could have cake or ice cream, he was conversationally implying that you can't have pie. And the reason that he conversationally implied that is because, if he were cooperating and following the conversational rules, or maxims, then he would have mentioned pie. So you assumed that since he said only cake and I, cake or ice cream, that you can't have pie. He, in effect, conversationally implied that you cannot have pie. And the way you figured that out was you took what he said, a little background knowledge about him being a waiter and having certain goals and what happens in restaurants. Performed a little mini calculation using the maxim of quantity. And inferred that he must believe that you can't have pie. And of course since he's a waiter, he ought to know whether you can have something else or not, and therefore you can't have pie. But what if he had a favorite customer at another table and he knew there was only one slice of pie back there and he didn't want you to order it?
Play video starting at :10:56 and follow transcript10:56
And he said, you can have cake or ice cream. And didn't mention the pie so you wouldn't order it and his favorite customer would get it instead of you. Well, he still conversationally implied that you can't have pie. But he misled you. He misled you because he was trying to get the pie for somebody else. He was not cooperating with you. So the tricky thing about these conversational maxims is they work perfectly fine when you're cooperating with the person and trying to give them all of the information that they need for your common purpose with that other person. But if you're not cooperating then you can use them to mislead the other person. And that's the double edged sword of conversational implication.
Play video starting at :11:41 and follow transcript11:41
But one of the features of conversational implication is really important to arguments, and that's that you can cancel conversational implications. The waiter can say you can have cake or ice cream, oh yeah, and you can also have pie. And when he said, and also you can have pie, he did not take back you can have cake or ice cream, because you can still have cake or ice cream. It's just that, you can also have pie.
Play video starting at :12:8 and follow transcript12:08
So, we can cancel the conversational implication that you cannot have pie by saying, oh, yeah, and you can also have pie.
Play video starting at :12:16 and follow transcript12:16
So with a conversational implication, if a certain sentence, P, conversationally implies another sentence, Q, then you can deny Q and P still might be true.
Play video starting at :12:27 and follow transcript12:27
And that's an important fact because it distinguishes conversational implications from logical entailments or logical implications. If I say Alice is my sister, then that implies Alice is female, and I can't go, Alice is my sister, oh yeah, and she's not female. That doesn't make any sense because if she's not female, she can't be my sister because that's a logical implication or entailment.
Play video starting at :12:53 and follow transcript12:53
But with a conversational implication instead, you can deny what is conversationally implied. And the original sentence is still true. So if the waiter says you can have cake, or ice cream, and then, I find out that he's been saving the last piece of pie for this other table, then I can come up to him and say wait a minute, you lied to me. He didn't really lie to me, because what he said was still true. I could have cake or ice cream. It's still true, I can have cake or ice-cream. He didn't say anything false to me. He simply didn't mention the pie that I could also have. So that's very different in the case of conversational implication, than in the case of logical entailment. And that'll be important to us, especially when we get to formal logic, in a later part of this course. So let me give you another example that's more important. Imagine a politician says I've got a policy that's going to reduce crime by getting criminals off the streets. And the policy is lock them all up. When people are suspected of crimes, you'll lock them all up. That's going to get criminals off the street.
Play video starting at :14:2 and follow transcript14:02
Well that might convince people if they don't notice that he's left out another fact. He's not just going to get people off the street who are criminals, he's going to get lots of other people off the street too. He didn't give you all the relevant information, like the waiter who mislead you with the pie. He suggested that his policy will solve the problem of crime by putting people in prison who would commit crimes. And just left out the other relevant fact, that it's going to put lots of other people in prison too. So he has conversationally implied that there's no other relevant facts to consider by only mentioning that it's going to reduce the crime rate. And you have to be good at looking through that implication and asking, yes, but is there something he's leaving out? And that's often what you need to do in order to avoid being misled by sleazy politicians and other people who leave out the relevant information for the issue that you're talking about. Now, of course, the politician might not care that he misled you, that might be the goal. He wants to persuade you and he doesn't care whether he misleads you because it's persuasion not justification that he's interested in.
Play video starting at :15:12 and follow transcript15:12
In addition, he's got his defense ready. He can say, but I didn't say anything false, what I said was true. If we put all those potential criminals in jail we're going to reduce the crime rate. Maybe it's also true that we're going to put some innocent people in jail, but we will reduce the crime rate and that's what I said. What Grice's maxim of quantity does is it tells us exactly why we have a criticism of him now. We can say he's not cooperating because he's not following the conversational maxim of quantity. He's not giving us all the relevant information that we need in order to achieve our purpose if we have a common purpose. And this politician is pretending to have a common purpose with us, the good of the country, when actually he doesn't have a common purpose with us, he just wants to get elected.
Play video starting at :16:1 and follow transcript16:01
And so Grice gives us an insight into what's going on when we get misled in those contexts, and also what we need to do to respond to those types of bad arguments. Now this distinction between conversational implication and logical entailment is crucial to arguments, because it tells us something about how to refute arguments. When you don't like the premise of an argument, because it's misleading, because it conversationally implies something false. That's not a way to show that the premise is false. In order to show it's false you have to show that it actually logically entails something that's false then you can infer that the premise itself is false. This will become important later when we look at the role of conversational implication and logical entailment in arguments. But for now, the important thing is to understand the distinction between conversational implication and logical entailment. Speakers usually follow these conversational maxims that Grice enunciated, when they speak, and when they're cooperating. But they don't always follow these maxims, sometimes they violate them. And of course, as always, there's a lot more to be said about conversational acts. If you want to learn more about conversational acts you should look at the chapter in understanding arguments in the text that accompanies this course.
Play video starting at :17:19 and follow transcript17:19
But I think we've learned enough about conversational acts to move on. Because so far we've looked at language in general at the linguistic level, at the speech act level, and at the conversational act level. Now we want to take these lessons. And apply them more specifically to the language of argument. That is the particular kind of language that gets used in arguments. And that's what will be the topic for the next few lectures.
