# Argument markers
We need to understand the language of argument in order to be able to spot an argument, that is to determine when a passage contains an argument and what part of the passage is that argument. So, how can we tell when an argument is being given? Well, recall the definition of argument as a series of sentences, statements, or propositions, where some of there premises, and one of them's a conclusion, and the premises are intended to give a reason for the conclusion. So the real question of when an argument is being given comes down to the question of when certain sentences are intended as reasons for other sentences. Now the answer is that, we can tell a person's intentions when they're speaking by which words they choose. So there are going to be certain words that indicate that some sentences are reasons for others. Just compare these two sentences. I am tall and I good at sports.
Play video starting at :1:18 and follow transcript1:18
And compare that to; I am tall, so I am good at sports. Now notice that you can take the first sentence, I am tall and I am good at a sports, and switch it around, I am good at sports and I am tall. Switching doesn't make any difference. But it's very different if you say, I am tall, so I am good at sports. That's very different from, I'm good at sports, so I am tall. So we know from the fact that you can switch around the and sentence and you cannot switch around the so sentence. The word so introduces something very different from just conjoining the two claims. But then, what's the difference?
Play video starting at :1:59 and follow transcript1:59
Well, the difference is that when you use the word and, you're simply stating the two facts. I am tall. I am good at sports. And the is they're both true. But when you use the word so, you're indicating that one of them is a reason for the other. If you say, I am tall, so I am good at sports, then you're suggesting that the reason why you're good at sports is that you're tall. But if you say, I'm good at sports, so I am tall. You're indicating that the fact that you're good at sports is some kind of evidence that you must be tall. Maybe because you can only be good at sports of you're tall, which isn't true. That just shows it's a bad argument. But it is an argument, because by using the word so, you're indicating that one of the sentences is the reason for the other. Of course the word so is not the only word that plays this role in arguments or has this function. You can also say, I am tall. Therefore, I am good at sports. I am tall. Thus, I am good at sports. Or I am tall. Hence, I am good at sports. Or I am tall. Accordingly, I am good at sports.
Play video starting at :3:7 and follow transcript3:07
All of these different pairs of sentences play the same role. They indicate that there's an argument there, namely, the fact that I am tall is a reason for the conclusion that I am good at sports. So, we're going to call all these words argument markers, because they mark or indicate the presence of an argument. Next, we want to distinguish two different kinds of argument markers. So far, we've looked at so, and therefore, and thus, and accordingly. Each of those indicates that the sentence right after that is a conclusion, and the other sentence in the pair is a premise. So, we're going to call these conclusion markers because they indicate that the sentence right after them is a conclusion. But the other argument markers that also indicate arguments in the same way. What they indicate is that the sentence after them is a reason, or a premise, not a conclusion. For example, I could say, I'm good at sports because I am tall. Now the word because indicates that the fact I'm tall is a reason for the conclusion that I'm good at sports. It doesn't mean that the sentence after the word because is a conclusion. Instead, it means that the sentence after the word because is a reason, or a premise. So, we're going to call it a reason marker, or a premise marker. And there are other reason markers as well. You could say, I am good at sports for I am tall. I am good at sports, as I am tall. I am good at sports, for the reason that I am tall. I'm good at sports and the reason why is that I am tall.
Play video starting at :4:59 and follow transcript4:59
All of these words, both the conclusion markers and the reason markers, indicate that there's an argument present, but only in some cases. You can't just look at the word and figure out whether it's an argument marker or not. You have to think about the role that it's playing. A perfect example of that is another reason marker, since. You can say, I'm good at sports since I am tall. And then it looks like you're presenting the fact that you're tall as a reason why you're good at sports. But the word since doesn't always play that role. After all, you can say, the sun has been up since 7 o'clock this morning. And that doesn't mean that somehow the sun has an alarm clock that causes it to come right up at 7 o'clock. All it's saying is that the sun has been up after the time of 7 o'clock and all times since then. It doesn't indicate any kind of rational relation. Such as, the fact that at 7 o'clock being the reason why the sun came up. Or what about this one? It's been raining since my vacation began. Very disappointing, but you're not saying that it's raining because your vacation began as if there's some kind of plot against you and the nature or weather. That would be very paranoid. All you're saying is that, it has been raining everyday since the time when your vacation began, or everyday after your vacation began. So the since there, indicates just a temporal relation, not some kind of rational relation.
Play video starting at :6:36 and follow transcript6:36
And what this shows us is that you can't just look for the word since and always mark it as an argument marker. You have to think about what the word since is doing in that context, and that'll be true for a lot of other reason markers and conclusion markers as well. Here's another example the same point, but with a conclusion marker, the word so. The word so sometimes indicates that, the sentence after it is a conclusion and the sentence before it's a reason. But it can also indicate something entirely different. You don't need to eat so much.
Play video starting at :7:9 and follow transcript7:09
So there doesn't indicate that much is a reason for anything.
Play video starting at :7:14 and follow transcript7:14
The word so is getting used in an entirely different way. That should be obvious. But the point again, is that you can't just look for the word so and label it as an argument marker. You have to think about the function that it's playing in the particular context. But then how can we tell what role a word is playing in a particular context. Here's a little trick. Try substituting another word that's clearly an argument marker. That is, it's clearly a reason marker or a conclusion marker. For the original word that you weren't so sure about.
Play video starting at :7:50 and follow transcript7:50
Here's an example. He's so cool!
Play video starting at :7:55 and follow transcript7:55
Does that mean he's because cool? No, if you substitute because for so the meaning changes entirely.
Play video starting at :8:4 and follow transcript8:04
Not even clear what it means. Or how about, he's therefore cool. That don't make much sense either. So in this case you can't substitute another argument marker because or therefore for the original word so without changing the meaning of the sentence entirely. And that shows you that, in the original sentence, the word so was not being used, as an argument marker. Either a reason marker or conclusion marker.
Play video starting at :8:35 and follow transcript8:35
Here's another example. Well, since he left college, he's been unemployed.
Play video starting at :8:41 and follow transcript8:41
Well are you saying that, because he left college he's unemployed? Maybe, if that's what you're saying then you can substitute the word because without changing the meaning of the sentence. And then the word since was being used as a reason marker in that case. But probably not. Probably, the claim is simply that since the time when he left college, he's been unemployed.
Play video starting at :9:6 and follow transcript9:06
And then if that's what you mean, then when you substitute because for since, it changes the meaning.
Play video starting at :9:14 and follow transcript9:14
And that would show that in that context the word is not playing the role of an argument marker, or a reason marker. Because it changes the meaning to substitute something like because that's clearly an argument marker.
Play video starting at :9:32 and follow transcript9:32
On the other hand, you might have a similar claim where you can substitute it.
Play video starting at :9:39 and follow transcript9:39
Since he failed out of college, he's unemployed.
Play video starting at :9:44 and follow transcript9:44
Whoa! Now, if somebody says that, they don't just mean since the time when he failed out of college he's unemployed. Probably the meaning is not changed if you simply said because he failed out of college, he's unemployed.
Play video starting at :9:59 and follow transcript9:59
So, since you can substitute because for since in that sentence, in that sentence the word since is probably being used as an argument marker. That's the role it's playing. That's it's function. That's how it's being used.
Play video starting at :10:13 and follow transcript10:13
And notice also, that you can tell that the word since in that sentence is a reason marker instead of a conclusion marker. Because you can substitute because, and you cannot substitute therefore.
Play video starting at :10:26 and follow transcript10:26
Therefore he failed out of college, he's been unemployed. That doesn't make a lot of sense.
Play video starting at :10:34 and follow transcript10:34
So, if you can substitute because without changing the meaning, then the original word, since in this case, was being used as a reason marker.
Play video starting at :10:46 and follow transcript10:46
You cannot substitute the word therefore. That shows it's not being used as a conclusion marker.
Play video starting at :10:52 and follow transcript10:52
So you can use this substitution test to determine whether the word is being used as a reason marker or as a conclusion marker, or as no indicator whatsoever of an argument but in some entirely different way.
Play video starting at :11:6 and follow transcript11:06
One last word that we have to talk about is that little word if. Sometimes it's linked with the word then, in an if-then clause, which is also called a conditional. And we'll talk a lot about conditionals later in this course. But for now, I just want to make one point.
Play video starting at :11:26 and follow transcript11:26
The word if might seem like an argument marker, because it's often used in arguments. For example; I might say, If I'm rich enough, I can buy a baseball team.
Play video starting at :11:38 and follow transcript11:38
I am rich enough, so I can buy a baseball team. That would be an argument. But if all I say is If I'm rich enough, I can buy a baseball team, when I know I'm not rich enough. So, I would never assert the if clause that says I am rich enough. Then, that little if sentence is not being used to indicate an argument at all. Its just saying, if If I am rich enough, then I can buy a baseball team. It's not saying that I am rich enough, and it's not saying that I can buy a baseball team. So, the word if by itself does not indicate an argument. It sets a pattern for argument, if one thing then another. Well, the one thing, therefore, the other. But the IF (one thing) THEN (another) doesn't by itself indicate any argument at all because it doesn't assert that IF clause which is also called the antecedent of the conditional. So we are not going to count the word if as an argument marker. Now we've learned how to identify an argument. It's simple, huh? But just to make sure you've got it straight, let's do a few exercises.

# Standard form
Now that we've identified arguments, and we've also identified premises and conclusions, we need to put them in order. The actual word order doesn't always tell us the order of argument. Compare these two sentences: because I am a professor, I teach classes, I teach classes, because I am a professor. In those two examples, the words, I am a professor, in one instance, occur at the beginning, and the other instance occur at the end. But they actually express exactly the same argument, namely, the fact that I'm a professor, is a reason why I teach classes. But contrast both of those with this example.
Play video starting at ::47 and follow transcript0:47
I teach classes so I must be a professor. The point there must be something like, nobody but professors can teach classes, and whether nor not that's true, point here is, that's a different argument from the first one. And we need to represent the difference between these two arguments very carefully. In order to show what is shared by the first two examples that's different from the third example, we put the arguments in what's called standard form. And it's really easy.
Play video starting at :1:22 and follow transcript1:22
Basically, you put the premise down, and if there's another premise you put that down. Then you draw a line.
Play video starting at :1:30 and follow transcript1:30
Then you put what I call a dot pyramid, it's basically three little dots with two at the bottom and one at the top, and then you put the conclusion after that. It's also useful; we'll see why later. But it's useful to number the premises, and to number the conclusion, so that we can refer back to the premise and conclusion with the number, instead of having to repeat it all the time. And that's all there is to standard form. You just put down the premises on different lines. Then you draw a line, put the little dot pyramid, and then write down the conclusion, and then number them all.
Play video starting at :2:7 and follow transcript2:07
That's it.
Play video starting at :2:9 and follow transcript2:09
And this standard form accomplishes what we wanted it to. Namely, it helps us show what's common to the first two examples at the beginning of this lecture, that distinguishes them from the third example. So the first two examples were, I teach classes because I'm a professor, and because I'm a professor I teach classes. There the sentence, the premise that goes above the line is, I am a professor, and the conclusion that goes below the line and next to the dot pyramid is, I teach classes.
Play video starting at :2:43 and follow transcript2:43
But the next example, the third example at the beginning of the lecture was, I teach classes,
Play video starting at :2:50 and follow transcript2:50
so I must be a professor. Now that means that, I am a professor, is the conclusion that goes below the line, next to the dot pyramid, and the premise is, I teach classes. So when you put these two in standard form, right next to each other, it makes it absolutely clear what the difference is. And what's in common to the first two that distinguishes them from the third one.
Play video starting at :3:18 and follow transcript3:18
No matter how easy, I think it's still worthwhile to do a few exercises just to make sure we've got it straight, because this notion of standard form will become important later.

# A problem for arguments
Now we've learned how to identify an argument and put it in standard form, and we've also learned from the definition of argument that the premises are intended to be reasons for the conclusion.
Play video starting at ::14 and follow transcript0:14
Great. Intended to be a reason for the conclusion. Well, intentions are nice, but success is better. What we need to figure out is when the person succeeds in giving premises that really are reasons for the conclusion. For simplicity, let's focus on arguments whose purpose is justification.
Play video starting at ::35 and follow transcript0:35
Then the question is, do the premises justify you in believing the conclusion? Well, imagine that you don't know whether there's any life on Mars. You have no evidence, one way or the other. Then you ask a friend, and the friend says, hah, I know there's life on Mars. I can prove it to you. Here, this argument will show you that there's life on Mars.
Play video starting at :1:3 and follow transcript1:03
There is at least one bacterium on Mars. Therefore there is life on Mars. Now, notice that if the premise is true, the conclusion has gotta be true. And if you and your friend are justified in believing the premise, then you and your friend are also justified in believing the conclusion. So, this argument looks pretty good so far.
Play video starting at :1:28 and follow transcript1:28
But of course, you have to ask your friend, well, how do you know that there's at least one bacterium on Mars? And suppose your friend says, well, I, I'm just guessing. Then, the argument is clearly no good. If there's no reason to believe the premise because your friend is just guessing, then you're not justified in believing that premise, and if you're not justified in believing the premise, then how can that premise make you justified in believing the conclusion?
Play video starting at :1:59 and follow transcript1:59
More generally, an argument cannot justify you in believing the conclusion unless you're justified in accepting the premises of that argument.
Play video starting at :2:9 and follow transcript2:09
Now, suppose your friend says, but I do have a reason for the premise, I do! Then, we have to ask, what kind of reason is it? And, at that point, your friend needs to express that reason, and how do we express reasons? In arguments. So your friend needs to give another argument for the premise, where the premise of the first argument is the conclusion of the second argument. But wait a minute, now we've got a problem. Because that second argument is itself going to have premises, and you have to be justified in believing those. So, the premises of the second argument have to be the conclusion of a third argument, and so on and so on. Because the third argument needs premises, they have to be justified, so they have to be the conclusion of another argument, which also has to have premises, and those have to be the conclusion of another argument, and so on and so on. It looked like we've got a real problem here.
Play video starting at :3:10 and follow transcript3:10
In order for the premises to be justified, they have to be backed up by an argument, but the argument has premises of its own that have to be backed up by another argument, and so on and so on. This problem is called The Problem of the Skeptical Regress, because you regress back to one argument after another, after another, after another, after another, after another, after another. And it's hard to see how that regress is ever going to come to an end. There seem to be only three ways to get around the skeptical regress. The first is to start with a premise that's unjustified. If it's unjustified, then it doesn't need an argument to back it up, and that means that you're not going to have this chain of arguments going back and back and back and back and back and back and back. The second possibility is to have a structure where the arguments move in a circle.
Play video starting at :4:1 and follow transcript4:01
One claim is justified by another, which is justified by another, which is justified by another, which is justified by the first claim, and they just move in a circle. The third possibility is that the chain of arguments goes back infinitely. It never stops. Every claim has an argument to back it up. And there's no end, so you never have a premise which doesn't have an argument to back it up, because it's infinite.
Play video starting at :4:27 and follow transcript4:27
Those seem to be the three main options here to avoid the skeptical regress. The first possibility then, is to start with a premise that's unjustified. And that seems pretty neat, if you can get away with it. But we already saw why that won't work. We saw your friend arguing that there's life on Mars because there's at least one bacterium on Mars, and he was just guessing. If you just guess at your premises, you have no reason to believe them. Then, an argument that uses those premises cannot justify you in believing the conclusion. But in addition, just think about it this way, you could prove anything if we let you start with unjustified premises. If you can just make up your premises for no reason, then there's no stopping you from believing whatever, including things that are obviously false. So it seems to be a real problem to start with premises that are unjustified. Next, the second way to respond to the skeptical regress is to use a circular structure, and it's kind of neat, if you think about it. Because, if you want to prove one claim, you prove it on the basis of another claim. And then you prove that second claim on the basis of a third. And that third on the basis of fourth. And the fourth on the basis of a fifth. And the fifth on the basis of the first. And now you've got this circle. And the arguments go in a circle, but that means that every premise has an argument to back it up, because you can keep going around the circle forever.
Play video starting at :5:58 and follow transcript5:58
And if you think about it a little bit, it'll be obvious that that's no good, and that can be shown by looking at the smallest circle there is.
Play video starting at :6:7 and follow transcript6:07
So, suppose your friend says, I can prove there's life on Mars, here's my argument. There is life on Mars. Therefore, there is life on Mars. Clearly that's no good. And the reason why it's no good is that if you didn't know whether there was life on Mars to begin with, you wouldn't know whether the premise was true. because if you don't know the conclusion, you can't know the premise since the premise is the conclusion.
Play video starting at :6:32 and follow transcript6:32
So if you're not justified in believing the conclusion to begin with, you're not justified in believing the premise, and that means that the argument didn't really get you anywhere. It just ends up where it started. And in addition, it has the same problem we saw in the first approach, involving unjustified premises. Because you can use circular arguments to prove anything. You can prove there's life on Mars. There's life on Mars, therefore there's life on Mars. You can prove there's
Play video starting at :7: and follow transcript7:00
no life on Mars. There's no life on Mars, therefore there's no life on Mars. You can do it either way. And the fact that an argument can be used either way to prove either conclusion suggests there's a big problem with that kind of argument. So now we're down to the third and final way to get around the skeptical regress, and that's to use an infinite chain of arguments. But if you think about it in a concrete case, you'll see why that's a problem as well.
Play video starting at :7:30 and follow transcript7:30
Suppose your friend says, there's life on Mars and I can prove it. And you say fine, give me a reason.
Play video starting at :7:37 and follow transcript7:37
Well, there's at least one bacterium on Mars, therefore, there's life on Mars. And you go, okay, fine, but how do you know there's at least one bacterium on Mars? I've got another argument, he says.
Play video starting at :7:48 and follow transcript7:48
There are at least two bacteria on Mars. Therefore, there's at least one bacterium on Mars. But how do you know there's at least two? Well, there are at least three bacteria on Mars, therefore there are at least two bacteria on Mars. But how do you know there are at least three? Well, there are at least four, so there are at least three. Well, there are at least five, so there are at least four. Well, there are at least six, so there are at least five, and so on, and so on, and so on. You could go on infinitely. So, an infinite chain of arguments would allow you to prove that there's life on Mars, even if you have no evidence whatsoever of any bacteria. Because you're going to have an argument, but if the premise that you're arguing from doesn't have an independent justification, then the infinite chain is going to be no good at all in justifying the conclusion of that argument. So many people see the skeptical regress as a deep and serious philosophical issue. If the unjustified premise approach doesn't work, and the circular argument structure doesn't work, and the infinite chain of arguments doesn't work, then it's hard to see how we can get around the problem, which is to say it's hard to see how any kind of argument could ever justify us in believing anything. Philosophers really scratched their heads about that for a long time and worry about it. It keeps them up at night.
Play video starting at :9:17 and follow transcript9:17
But, we're going to have to look at how practical people solve a similar problem in everyday life. So how do we solve the skeptical regress problem in everyday life? Well, there are various tricks that you can use. For example, one way is to just start from assumptions that everybody shares. So,
Play video starting at :9:40 and follow transcript9:40
if I say, well you really ought to buy a Honda, because Hondas are very reliable cars.
Play video starting at :9:47 and follow transcript9:47
Then I'm assuming that you want your car to be reliable. You don't like to have to take it in to the mechanic all the time. You don't want it to break down on the road. And if you want reliability and I want reliability, then we can start from the assumption that reliability is a good thing and that that's a reason to buy a car that is reliable. But of course you might say, well, but are Hondas reliable? And then I might appeal to an authority. Well, it's obvious that they are, or Consumer Reports has done a study that shows that they're reliable.
Play video starting at :10:22 and follow transcript10:22
And I can appeal to an authority and if you accept that authority, you go Consumer Reports, we can trust them. Then my argument's going to work. You're going to have a reason to believe the conclusion, and it might persuade you, and make you come to believe the conclusion.
Play video starting at :10:37 and follow transcript10:37
But, suppose that someone is going to raise an objection. They say, well, Consumer Reports has been wrong before, they might be wrong this time.
Play video starting at :10:48 and follow transcript10:48
Well, then I need to discount that objection. I need to respond to it and say, well, maybe they have been wrong sometimes but this time, you know, they've got a good study and it was careful or whatever, and the but means I'm discounting the objection that you raised, and I might even discount it in advance.
Play video starting at :11:10 and follow transcript11:10
Or I might just guard my claim. I might say well, they might be right in this case or they're probably right without claiming that they definitely are right. So, I can assure you by citing some kind of authority. I can discount objections and I can guard my premises by saying, well, it's probably right, instead of saying it's definitely right. And those are three ways of solving the skeptical regress problem in everyday life that we're going to look at in much more detail in the next three lectures. But the point of this lecture has been more general. In order to solve the skeptical regress problem, you have to find some assumptions that you and your audience share. They might be assumptions about the premises of your arguments. They might be assumptions about authorities that supposedly support your premises and they accept as authorities, or whatever. But there have to be some assumptions that you share with your audience in order to get the argument going.
Play video starting at :12:8 and follow transcript12:08
And that's kind of tricky, because it's going to depend on the context.
Play video starting at :12:12 and follow transcript12:12
If you're dealing with an audience that shares a lot of your assumptions, then argument's going to be relatively easy. But if you're dealing with an audience that doesn't share any of your assumptions, it's going to be impossible, and in areas where there's lots of disagreement, it's going to be hard to get your arguments going because your premises are going to be questioned and denied or rejected by the people in the audience. So what these tricks do is they give you ways to get the argument going, but they're not going to work in every case. And we'll have to look at that, as we're looking at these three different ways to solve the skeptical regress problem in the next three lectures.

# Assuring
In the previous lecture, we looked at the skeptical regress problem and I kind of introduced three different ways of solving that problem in practical life. Namely assuring, guarding, and discounting.
Play video starting at ::16 and follow transcript0:16
Those are three ways to solve the skeptical regress problem in practical life, and in the next three lectures what we're going to do is look at each of these, in much more detail, and more carefully, so as to understand how they work. Let's begin with assuring.
Play video starting at ::32 and follow transcript0:32
Here's an example. I assure you that smoking is bad for your health. If I say, I assure you, then I'm trying to get you to accept that claim on my authority. Now I might have some reason for saying that smoking is bad for your health, namely, I've read the US Surgeon General's report, which cites the scientific evidence to show, that smoking is bad for your health. But notice that I don't actually say it, when I say, well it's obvious that smoking is bad for your health. Or everybody knows that smoking is bad for your health. Or I assure you, certainly, clearly, smoking is bad for your health. Then what I'm doing is I am trying to get you to accept that premise without actually citing the Surgeon General or anybody. I haven't cited the evidence. I simply have indicated to you I do have evidence. I do have a reason to believe that smoking is bad for your health, but I haven't given you what the reason is.
Play video starting at :1:34 and follow transcript1:34
So what good is that? It's a lot of good, because what it means is that if I don't give the reason, you can't question the reason. If I simply say everybody believes it, it's certainly true, then you can't ask whether those people who believe it have any reason to believe it. Or rather I have any reason to be so certain about it. If I don't give the reason, I've cut off your attack of the reason that I would give.
Play video starting at :2:1 and follow transcript2:01
So assuring is kind of tricky. I say I assure you, and if you can trust me, that's fine. But if you can't trust me, then you should be asking, well, what kind of reason does he really have?
Play video starting at :2:15 and follow transcript2:15
There are many ways to assure people. There are three kinds that we're going to look at: authoritative, reflexive, and abusive.
Play video starting at :2:24 and follow transcript2:24
Let's start with authoritative.
Play video starting at :2:26 and follow transcript2:26
Authoritative is just what it says, it cites an authority. So, I might say I assure you that smoking is bad for your health. The Surgeon General has shown that smoking is bad for your health. And I cite an authority, the Surgeon General. Okay. Fine. But, have you seen the studies? Have I cited the numbers? Have I told you when the studies were done, how many subjects, under what circumstances? Which statistical tests were used? How do you know it's causation instead or correlation and so on and so on. No, I just say the Surgeon General has shown this. And you're supposed to take my word for it that those are good studies, unless of course your share my assumption that the Surgeon General is trustworthy. So, that's the way an authoritative assurance works. It cites an authority that the audience shares as an authority with the other person. They share the assumption that that the authority is trustworthy. Now, sometimes it's the Surgeon General and the Surgeon General is pretty reliable. But you also get this kind of thing from reporters they say, an unimpeachable source close to the President has assured me that the President's plans are such and such. And they cite an unimpeachable source, but they won't tell you want the source is and they won't tell you how the source knew it was true.
Play video starting at :3:49 and follow transcript3:49
So they're citing an authority but they're not telling you what the authority is, or what reason the authority has for what the authority claims.
Play video starting at :3:58 and follow transcript3:58
Now if you trust that authority, then that's fine. And if authority's reliable, then you might be safe, but if you don't know who the authority is or where they got their information, there can be problems.
Play video starting at :4:13 and follow transcript4:13
And here's my favorite. Here's my favorite. I sometimes hear students say, but Professor [UNKNOWN] Armstrong, my teacher in the other course said that blah, blah, blah, blah, blah. Well, why do you trust your professors? I mean why do you trust me? You shouldn't be trusting me or your other professors any more than you're trusting an unimpeachable source close to the president.
Play video starting at :4:37 and follow transcript4:37
So, you have to trust somebody sometime, and you have to decide who you're going to trust.
Play video starting at :4:44 and follow transcript4:44
And then, it's going to be okay to cite an authority, in this kind of assurance, but you have to watch out for tricks when people start citing authorities that aren't really authorities, because even the best authorities sometimes do studies that aren't very careful, and might even be wrong. A second kind of assurance, is what I call reflexive, reflexive because it's talking about yourself.
Play video starting at :5:11 and follow transcript5:11
I believe that, I know that, I am certain that, I feel sure that.
Play video starting at :5:18 and follow transcript5:18
And you're signing something about your own mental state. You feel sure. Great, you feel sure, but why do you feel sure? Notice however, that this assurance works, because people don't want to question what other people feel sure about. If I say, well, I feel sure that this is going to happen, in many societies, it's going to be impolite to go, well, I don't feel sure. Matter of fact, I think you're wrong. Or, why do you feel sure? because then you're questioning the person. And if that's impolite, then using this type of phrase, I am certain that, will get people to shut up and not say anything. So here's an example from Monty Python. >> Now let's get one thing quite clear, I most definitely told you. But my favorite is when people say you know, I've held this opinion for years or I've thought about it year after year. It's really bothered me and you know, after careful consideration I've come to the conclusion that blah, blah, blah, whatever, and you're supposed to say, well, since you've thought about it so much, I'll save myself a lot of trouble of thinking about it, and trust you and go along with what you say.
Play video starting at :6:34 and follow transcript6:34
Well if you let other people do your thinking for you, then that's up to you.
Play video starting at :6:39 and follow transcript6:39
But you're going to be misled in some cases cause they thought about it for years and years and gotten themself into a tizzy and ended up at the wrong conclusion. So the fact that somebody's thought about it for years doesn't necessarily mean it's right. But somehow in conversation, when you say I've thought about it for a long time and checked all the sources I could, then people will take the fact that you've reached a certain conclusion to be okay for them to reach the same conclusion. And that's how this reflexive type of assurance works.
Play video starting at :7:14 and follow transcript7:14
The most fun of all is the abusive assurance.
Play video starting at :7:18 and follow transcript7:18
Here's another example from Monty Python. >> No, no, nonsense! >> Maybe he's right. Maybe it is nonsense. That the point is that he gets you to accept what he believes by abusing you and calling it nonsense. And the same thing happens when somebody says, nobody but a fool would think that. Everybody knows this. If you say, everybody knows it, then you're saying, well, if you don't know it, then you're a dummy. And so they're abusing you in order to get you to agree with them by making a conditional abuse that applies to you only if you don't agree with them. And you don't want to be a dummy. You don't want to speak nonsense. You don't want to say something that's stupid. So if somebody says, you'd have to be stupid to disagree with me about this, then that's going to incline you to agree with them. Some of these abusive assurances are a little bit more subtle, so it's worth mentioning one that's used all the time, and this is what might be called appeal to common sense. Someone says, it's just common sense that such and such. It doesn't matter what the such and such is, the point here is simply that if you deny that, then you're telling that person you lack common sense. And nobody wants to lack common sense. So by saying, it's just common sense that, it's just plain common sense. People say it all the time, but what they're doing is they're abusing their opponents by saying that their opponents lack common sense. So it's a little bit more subtle, but it shows that abuse of assurances occur either subtly or openly all the time. So we've see three different types of assurances. Okay. The first is authoritative, the second is reflexive and the third is abusive.
Play video starting at :9:17 and follow transcript9:17
And they're all used in common speech to stop the skeptical regress problem. So why do we need any of these assurances in the first place? And the answer is, we've got limited time.
Play video starting at :9:31 and follow transcript9:31
You know, you can't go out and check every study, you can't go out and look into every issue. You've just got to accept authorities and listen to other people and learn from them, or you'll never be able to figure out the issues that matter to you in life.
Play video starting at :9:49 and follow transcript9:49
So assuring can be a perfectly good thing. If you trust the Surgeon General of the United States instead of going out and starting your own laboratory and doing your own statistical studies, there's absolutely nothing wrong with that.
Play video starting at :10:4 and follow transcript10:04
But when you start trusting authorities that are not worthwhile, or not trustworthy, then, you can get yourself into trouble. And we'll talk later in the course, about, ways to tell which authorities are reliable or trustworthy and which ones are not.
Play video starting at :10:21 and follow transcript10:21
That tells you why, assurances are needed in general, but what about particular cases?
Play video starting at :10:27 and follow transcript10:27
Well when you're talking to a certain audience,
Play video starting at :10:30 and follow transcript10:30
if they share your trust of a certain authority, or if they trust you when you give a reflexive assurance, or if what you're saying really is something that everybody with common sense believes in, then again, it can be perfectly fine to use an assurance. It saves you the time of having to go check out every issue and it helps you avoid the skeptical regress problem in a very practical way. So assuring can be a really useful tool in argument. But, you have to be careful because assurances are also subject to a lot of tricks that you have to learn to watch out for. We've already seen that you can cite authorities that aren't trustworthy and that's kind of obvious.
Play video starting at :11:18 and follow transcript11:18
But something that's maybe a little less obvious is that people use assurances at points in their argument in order to distract you. When something really is questionable, they often say, well, that's obvious.
Play video starting at :11:33 and follow transcript11:33
In order to get you to not pay attention to it. So when someone says that's obvious, it's certain, I'm sure, it's worth looking carefully at what they're so sure about and asking yourself whether you agree with them because people try to paper over the cracks in their arguments with these assurances, at least in some cases, and you have to learn to watch out for that. Another trick is when assurances get dropped. People will start off saying, you know, he believes this, I believe that, and then they drop it and start talking as if it's true. You know, my favorite example of this was a case a few years ago when there was a person caught in Germany for cannibalism. And it started off with the reporters saying, well he, the person accused of cannibalism says that there are lots of other cannibals in Germany.
Play video starting at :12:29 and follow transcript12:29
And then, it becomes, it is reported that there are lots of cannibals in Germany. And then it became, sources have said that, as if the sources are reliable. And pretty soon they were saying, there are lots of cannibals in Germany. And it moved from, he believes it to there are lots of them. And that's the trick of dropping the assurance in a way that can be illegitimate. So, assurances can be useful and they can also be misleading. And, that's going to be true of all the different ways of stopping the skeptical regress. There can be uses and abuses of all of these tricks. For assurances, we want to have an assurance when, first of all, somebody might question it. Second, the audience accepts the authority that is being referred to. And third, it would be too much trouble to actually cite the study and all the numbers, and the evidence, and the particular people.
Play video starting at :13:36 and follow transcript13:36
The assurances are not appropriate when nobody would question the claim anyway. Then why are you wasting your time assuring people?
Play video starting at :13:45 and follow transcript13:45
When the authority that you're basing your assurance on is not really trustworthy. Because then, why should they believe your assurances? And third when you've got plenty of time and it would be really easy to give the reasons straight-forwardly instead of simply assuring them. So, you've got good and bad uses of assurances. And I hope we understand what they are and how to distinguish them, but let's do a few exercises just to make sure that we've got the general idea.

# guarding
The second common move in arguments that's supposed to solve the skeptical regress problem is guarding. The basic idea of guarding is very simple. It's just making the premises of your argument weaker so that there will be fewer ways in which your opponents can raise trouble for them, or show that they're false. So here's an example. Suppose someone says, we ought not to build any new nuclear power plants because they'll explode.
Play video starting at ::32 and follow transcript0:32
Now wait a minute. How do you know that any of them really will explode? How can you tell that in the future? You don't even know what kinds of standards they're going to be built to.
Play video starting at ::45 and follow transcript0:45
So someone could object to that argument by saying you're not justified in asserting that premise that these new nuclear power plants will explode.
Play video starting at ::55 and follow transcript0:55
So how do you stop that problem? Well, you simply say, well, we ought not to build any new nuclear power plants because some of them might explode. Or even weaker, because I believe that some of them might explode. Now we've got a premise. I believe that some of the new nuclear power plants might explode.
Play video starting at :1:20 and follow transcript1:20
That's going to be hard to deny. I mean, what's an opponent going to do? Show that you don't really believe it? Show that it's not true, that they might explode, that there's no possibility that they'll explode, or that any of them will explode? You know I couldn't mean all of them will, just some of them. So by guarding the premise in this way, you make it more likely to be true and less subject to objection. And that's what guarding does.
Play video starting at :1:45 and follow transcript1:45
It enables you to start an argument with that premise if other people agree that it's true because it's so weak. You get them to agree to share your assumption by weakening your premises. Now of course, what happens now if someone says wait a minute, they might explode. Sure, and the sun might not come up tomorrow. All kinds of things might not happen or might happen. Might's too weak to establish that we shouldn't have new nuclear power plants. So what you're suggesting is not just that it might happen but that it's likely to happen.
Play video starting at :2:22 and follow transcript2:22
And if the chance of it happening really is so slight as to be negligible, then you've weakened the premise too much, and it's not going to follow that we shouldn't have nuclear power plants. So the issue's going to come down to is the risk of them exploding, or some of them exploding, enough to justify the conclusion that we ought not to have them. And that's going to depend on exactly how much risk there is, and by looking at the guarding term, at the might term, and questioning it, and saying, can we replace might with probably, or something like that? Then we're going to have a better handle on how to assess the argument. So, when you see someone using guarding like this you need to ask, why did they put in the guard, And have they put in too much guarding that it's weakened it so much that the conclusion no longer follows?
Play video starting at :3:22 and follow transcript3:22
So the general trick of guarding is to weaken the premise, so it's going to be harder to deny, and that's how you argue against guarding. But there are at least three different ways to do this. Okay? One is the extent. The other is probability, and the other is mental. First, guarding by extent. We need a new alcohol officer on our campus, because all students drink too much. Well that's clearly false. Not all students drink too much.
Play video starting at :3:55 and follow transcript3:55
Most students drink too much. Well not most, maybe not most. Many students drink too much.
Play video starting at :4:6 and follow transcript4:06
Okay many, too many, because it's too much.
Play video starting at :4:9 and follow transcript4:09
Some students drink too much. Notice that you can guard or weaken the claim, the premise, from all students drink too much, to most students drink too much, to many students drink too much to some students drink too much. And as you move down that scale, the premise gets harder and harder to deny.
Play video starting at :4:34 and follow transcript4:34
So, whether this counts as guarding depends on the expectation. If you expect the claim that most or all students drink too much, then it's guarding to say many, or certainly to say some. But, if you don't expect that many or most or all, than to say some, is simply to say that you're talking about some. So, it's guarding when you weaken it beyond what would otherwise be expected in the context. This standard is going to be hard to apply because it might be difficult to say what the expectations are of the different people involved in a conversation, but that's what guarding is. It's not guarding every time you use the word many or most. It's only guarding when you're expecting all, and the person instead merely claimed many. The second kind of guarding concerns probability. Some people would say it's absolutely certain that O.J. Simpson killed his wife.
Play video starting at :5:39 and follow transcript5:39
And other people say well he probably killed his wife, or it's likely that he killed his wife. And others will say, there's a chance he killed his wife, another is, will say, he might have killed his wife. So when you change from, it's certain, to it's probable, or it's likely, or there's a chance, he might have. Again, you're moving down a continuum, and the further you move down that continuum, the easier it is to defend your premise because you're claiming less.
Play video starting at :6:12 and follow transcript6:12
And the question is going to be whether you've done it too much. If you simply say he might have killed his wife, therefore he ought to be convicted, that's clearly wrong. If you say probably killed his wife, so he ought to be convicted, that might be wrong, too, if there's a strong burden on the prosecution to prove guilt beyond a reasonable doubt.
Play video starting at :6:36 and follow transcript6:36
But you don't want to require that it's certain that he killed his wife because then you'll never be able to convict any criminals. So you need something like almost certain. You know, it's a bit of a fudge word, or beyond a reasonable doubt. In any case, however you assess whether or not he should have been convicted depending on how you assess how likely it was he really did what he was accused of,
Play video starting at :7: and follow transcript7:00
apart from all those questions, the point here is simply that in arguments in general, you can make the argument more defensible by weakening the premise so there are fewer ways to show that the premise is wrong. And that's the second type of guarding. Now a third type of guarding we can call mental, because it has to do with the mental state of the person asserting the premise. You might say, well, I know that the President is 50 years old. But you might say, I believe that the President is 50 years old. You might say, I tend to believe, or, I'm inclined to believe that the President is 50 years old. And there's another continuum as you move from knowledge to belief to inclination to believe. Again, you're making the premise weaker and weaker, which makes it harder and harder to question or deny or doubt that premise. So you avoided a problem for your argument, and potentially this is a way to, stop the skeptical regress.

#  discounting
Now the third common move in arguments, to protect premises and avoid the skeptical regress is discounting. Discounting, is basically citing the possible objection that you think other people might be thinking of, in order to head it off by providing a quick and dirty response to it right there.
Play video starting at ::22 and follow transcript0:22
For example, you might be talking to someone and say well, I'm thinking of buying that ring and it's really beautiful. And you're thinking, well they're going to object that the ring is very expensive too. So you say, well the ring is expensive but it's beautiful.
Play video starting at ::41 and follow transcript0:41
So what your doing is citing the objection. It's kind of odd if you think about it. If you want to buy the ring, why are you saying that its expensive? And the reason, is that you have already cited that objection, which makes it less likely that a person on the other side who doesn't want you to buy the ring, is going to say it. Because you've already said, I know that. But it's more important to me, that the ring is beautiful, so I want to buy it. So when you say, the ring is expensive, but it's beautiful, you're saying that it's expensive, that's the first thing. You're saying that it's beautiful, that's the second thing. You're saying with the word but that there's a contrast between the two, and you're indicating that the fact that it's beautiful is more important than the fact that it's expensive. You're saying all of that, simply by saying that the ring is expensive, but it is beautiful.
Play video starting at :1:36 and follow transcript1:36
So first, to say that the ring is expensive but it is beautiful is to say two things. It's like saying the ring is expensive, and it's beautiful.
Play video starting at :1:46 and follow transcript1:46
But, in other ways it's very different from and because if you say the ring is expensive and it's beautiful, you can switch them around. It's beautiful and it's expensive. It's expensive and it's beautiful. It's beautiful and it's expensive. You can say it either way. You can say it's expensive but it's beautiful. That's very different from saying it's beautiful but it's expensive. Think about it.
Play video starting at :2:11 and follow transcript2:11
If you were trying to argue for buying the ring. Which would you say. Well I would say, it's expensive, but it's beautiful. And if I'm trying to argue against buying the ring, I would say, it's beautiful, but it's expensive.
Play video starting at :2:27 and follow transcript2:27
Because the word but, indicates that the sentence after it, is in some way, more important than the other clause. You're discounting, the other objection and citing after the but clause, the reason for the belief or action that you favor. Thus, and, and but are very different. The sentence on either side of and are reversible and the sentences on either side of but are not reversible. And there are other words that are discounting phrases like but, that work the same way but fall in a different place. Consider the word although, you can say although the ring is expensive, it's beautiful and that sounds like the ring is expensive, but it's beautiful.
Play video starting at :3:17 and follow transcript3:17
Those are the sentences that someone would use if they're arguing for buying the ring because they want to emphasize that the ring is beautiful.
Play video starting at :3:26 and follow transcript3:26
The difference is that the word but occurs right before the clause that's getting emphasized, where as the word although, appears before the clause that's de-emphasized and it's the other clause that cites what the speaker takes to be more important. So, but and although are each discounting words. But the but, occurs before the emphasized clause and although occurs before the de-emphasized clause. What's common to these words like but and although is that they do three things.
Play video starting at :3:56 and follow transcript3:56
They assert two claims. They contrast those two claims. And they indicate that one of those claims is more important than the other.
Play video starting at :4:7 and follow transcript4:07
And there are lots of words that perform these functions. It's not just but and although. You have even if, even though, whereas. Nevertheless, nonetheless, still. And, as with other words that we've been studying like argument markers, for example, some of these words get used in other ways. So the word still, isn't always a discounting term. You say he's sitting still. You're not discounting an objection. It's when you use the word still at the beginning of the sentence. Still, the diamond is beautiful, or something like that. Then, the word still is getting used as a discounting word. And, like with other words we've studied, if you want to know in a particular case, whether the word still is being used as a discounting word, you ask whether you can substitute a different discounting word, and the sentence will function in basically the same way, and mean basically the same thing. And if it does, then, still is being used as the discounting word, and if it's not, then it's not being used as a discounting word, so we can use the substitution method to test for what the function of the word is. So why do people use discounting words like these?
Play video starting at :5:26 and follow transcript5:26
They use them in order to head off objections, because if you state the objection first, then your opponent seems a little silly to be saying it again. You just responded to them.
Play video starting at :5:37 and follow transcript5:37
And so, you can defend your premises or protect your premises and avoid the skeptical regress by discounting the kinds of objections, that people would raise that might seem to call for further argument. And that's a perfectly legitimate use. Sometimes you want to do that. You don't want to let your opponent raise an objection, because that might be misleading and gets you off on a tangent and it's a perfectly effective and useful legitimate move in an argument.
Play video starting at :6:6 and follow transcript6:06
But you also have to watch out, because there's some tricks associated with discounting terms. In particular I want to talk about the trick of discounting straw people. Well, one effective move in argument if you're just trying to persuade people is to make them not see the problems with your position and one way to do that is to say, I've got five objections I'm going to respond to. You know, you might say this, but. You might say that, however. You might say this, whereas. You might say that, still. You might say that, although. Right? And you discount each of those five objections,
Play video starting at :6:49 and follow transcript6:49
and yet what you do is you get to pick the objections.
Play video starting at :6:53 and follow transcript6:53
Right? So you can pick the easiest objections, not the hardest objections. And then, you've got the whole discussion focusing on the easiest objections. And as people are trying to keep all farther those in their minds straight, they forget about the other objections which might be even stronger. So you discount these straw people. Straw meaning easy to knock over. Easy to destroy. And, make people forget about, the objections that are harder to destroy that're going to cause more serious problems for your theory.
Play video starting at :7:25 and follow transcript7:25
So if you don't really want to know whether your theory's right or wrong. You're just trying to persuade people. That can be an effective move. And if you don't want to be persuaded by people who are trying to trick you like that, then you have to watch out for other people, discounting straw men and not facing the really more difficult objections to their views.
Play video starting at :7:45 and follow transcript7:45
And here's an even trickier trick. You can combine this trick of discounting straw people with other tricks that we saw for other words. So, suppose somebody says, well you know, the President is all in favor of some kind of public health service, but a public health service is not going to solve all of the medical problems of our people. So, I think the President is off on the wrong track.
Play video starting at :8:10 and follow transcript8:10
Well, notice what's happened here is you've discounted the objection that the public health service is going to solve all of the medical problems of our people. Whoever thought that a public health service would serve all of them medical problems of the people?
Play video starting at :8:26 and follow transcript8:26
So, you're discounting the straw man by using an unguarded term all. You put the unguarded term in the mouth of the objector. By not guarding it, you make their view more susceptible to refutation and make it easier for you to respond to that objection. Where as the objector really would have never used the unguarded term but would have used the guarding term like most or many. Of the health problems of our people. So by using discounting terms along with guarding terms and also assuring terms, you can make moves in argument that will point people towards issues that are framed in the way you want them to be framed instead of the way that they want them to be framed. That's the trick that you have to learn to watch out for. So here's a simple rule of thumb, when you think someone is trying to use discounting terms to lead you to look at easiest objections instead of the most difficult objections, then you can think about just forgetting the one's that this person mentioned, and ask what did they leave off the list? As a rule of thumb, that's usually a good idea. But, it's not always going to work. You're going to have to use your judgment. Still try it, maybe it will work in some of the cases where you want to stop other people from tricking you. Now, you should have a pretty good grasp on. Assuring, guarding, and discounting. Three common moves in argument, that are aimed at stopping the skeptical regress, and building common assumptions, with the people you're talking to. Let's do a few exercises, in order to contrast these three and make sure you understand them.

# Evaluation
There's one more kind of language that we need to discuss, because it's also used to stop the skeptical regress. Much like assuring and guarding and discounting, and this language is Evaluative. Just imagine, that a politician says, You ought to support my healthcare plan, because it would be good for the country. What is the word good doing here? Some philosopher's going to tell you that the word good is just a way of expressing your emotions. Or maybe telling you what to do. So the politician is saying, Yay, for my healthcare plan or telling you in an imperative form, you ought to support my healthcare plan. But that can't really be the whole story, because when someone says, Yay, Duke, like I do when I cheer for the Duke team. First of all I'm not saying that the team is good, I might cheer for the Duke team, even when I know they're not good. And secondly, you can't ask me why. If I say, Yay, Duke, it doesn't make any sense if you turn to me and say, but why? Why, yay Duke? It don't make any sense. So, merely to express your emotions with something like Yay, Duke, is very different from saying Duke has a good team. And saying Yay for my healthcare plan, is very different from saying that the healthcare plan is good for the country. Similarly, if I say, I don't like fish, so we shouldn't have fish for dinner. Well, I don't really owe you a reason. I can just say I just don't like the taste of fish, end of story, leave me alone.
Play video starting at :1:50 and follow transcript1:50
I don't owe you a reason for why I don't like fish, I just don't. But, if I say it's immoral to eat fish, it's wrong to eat fish. You ought not to eat fish. It's a very different story, now I owe you a reason. If I say, it's immoral to eat fish I need to say what's immoral about it? I need to point to some feature of eating fish that makes it immoral. I can't just use that evaluative language without some kind of reason to back it up, that would be illegitimate. So, what that shows is that merely expressing preferences is very different from making an evaluation and saying that something is good or bad or right or wrong or immoral or moral. And one way to capture this feature evaluative language is to interpret a word like Good as meets the standards and Bad as violates the standards. Notice it's very vague, because it doesn't tell you what the standards are and those standards will change from one context to another. If you're talking about a good painting, the standards of a good painting are different from when you're talking about say a good investment. Where the standards are going to be completely different from the aesthetic case.
Play video starting at :3:6 and follow transcript3:06
So, if we interpret good as meets the standards, and we say, my health care program is good for the country. Then that means, it meets the standards for what will make the country function in a certain way.
Play video starting at :3:20 and follow transcript3:20
Whereas if we say, eating fish is immoral, what we're saying is that eating fish violates a certain kind of standard. And more specifically it's a moral standard. That's why we use the word immoral. So we can interpret this language in terms of meeting or violating standards. And then, to give the reason, why it's good or bad, or right or wrong, or moral or immoral. We can cite the standard and apply it to the case in order to give a reason for why the evaluation holds. But now, here's the trick, when we call it good, we don't say what the standards are. We leave that up to the context to specify what kind of standard we're talking about. So, it's kind of like assuring, when you say, I assure you, and you might cite some, authority or tell them that you have some reason, and you don't tell them what the reason is. When you call it good, you say it does meet the standards, but you don't say the standards are. So, by alluding to the standards without actually laying them out, you have made your claim a little more defensible. Because, if you lay out the standards, they might be questionable and your audience would know exactly what to question and what to deny and how to object. But, if you simply say it's good, and all you're saying is, it meets the standards. Then, you've avoid it on objection and made your premise more defensible. And that's how this type of evaluation of language might help to stave off the skeptical regress. And here's another way evaluation can help. We don't always have to agree what the standards are. Suppose you're driving down the road and I say, you know we ought to turn left here. And you say, yeah we ought to turn left here. Well I might think that we ought to turn left here, because that's going to be a quicker way to get to our destination. But you might think that we ought to turn left here, because that's going to be a more beautiful view and you'll be able to look out on the hills.
Play video starting at :5:22 and follow transcript5:22
But, we can agree that we ought to turn left here. Cause, we both agree that turning left meets the standards, even though my standards are efficiency and getting there quickly. And your standards are aesthetic and getting beautiful views. So if you can get more people to agree to your premise simply by saying this health care plan will be good for the country, without saying exactly how it's going to be good. Then you've avoided people disputing your objections, because they can agree to it since they can use their own standards to determine whether it is good or not. And that could be yet another way to avoid the skeptical regress. Notice that evaluation can occur at a lot of different levels. We have some words that are very abstract like good and bad and ought and ought not, should, should not, right, wrong.
Play video starting at :6:15 and follow transcript6:15
And those words can be used in a lot of different context. You can have the wrong investment, or a good investment. Or an investment that you ought to make. But you can also drive on the right path, or a bad path or a way that you ought not to go. And so, you can have navigational standards and economic standards, but they can all be expressed by these very general abstract evaluative words. Like good and bad and right and wrong and ought and out not and should and should not and so on. But other evaluative words are much more specific. Now, for example, you can call a painting beautiful or ugly.
Play video starting at :7: and follow transcript7:00
But you don't call fertilizer beautiful or ugly. You would never say that a stock is beautiful or ugly. They're just not the kind of thing to be evaluated in that way. So an evaluative word like beautiful or ugly is more specific. It only applies to a small range of things. Things whereas other words apply like good and bad, apply to almost anything. Here's another example. Cruel or brave, a person can be cruel or brave. But you can't say that a painting is cruel or brave. Or a desk is cruel or brave, or a chair is cruel or brave. A chair might be comfortable.
Play video starting at :7:40 and follow transcript7:40
But a painting is not comfortable, and a soldier is not comfortable. Soldiers are brave or not, chairs are comfortable or not, but chairs are not brave or not, and soldiers are not comfortable or not. So these evaluative words like brave or cowardly, and beautiful are ugly, or comfortable or uncomfortable. Apply only to limited ranges of things, rather than to just about anything. So we have very general, or abstract devaluative words, and we have more specific More concrete evaluative words. And, of course, which ones are specific or concrete will vary. Some are more concrete than others. It's not an absolute dichotomy. But, some words that are evaluative really will apply to almost anything. And other words apply to a more limited class. And they vary in how limited that class of things they apply to will be. So you might ask, why are all these words evaluative words? Think about it. If you want to explain a more limited evaluative word like beautiful, you want to explain what it means. You need to define it in terms of the more general words, like good. If you want to say it's beautiful, you can say that kind of means looks good. I know that's not quite right, but basically, when you want to define the word beautiful, you need to cite one of the more general words good. And then cite the specific way in which it's good, namely, the way it looks. And when you want to say an economic word like bargain. Bargain means a good price. It sells for a good price, and a good price is a low price. So, when you define what a bargain is, you need to cite the word good in order to define bargain. So the relation between these very general evaluative words and the more specific evaluative words that makes them all evaluative. Is that you need to define the specific evaluative words in terms of the more general ones. So it all comes down to what makes something evaluative is its connection to what's good or bad or right or wrong or what ought or ought not to be done or should or shouldn't be done and so on. You know, the trickiest cases of evaluative words are, words that are contextually evaluative. They don't actually get defined by good or bad or right and wrong as their general meaning. But they do suggest an evaluation in a particular context. Let me give you an example of what I mean. A conservative politician might criticize her opponent by saying, Wow, his policies are way too liberal. Now, by calling them liberal, is that a criticism? Well, she intends it as a criticism, but does the word liberal mean that it's bad?
Play video starting at :10:33 and follow transcript10:33
Not really if you think about it, because the opponent might say, i'm proud to be a liberal. Being liberal's good, yes it's liberal, so what? Yes it's liberal, nothing wrong with that. The word liberal by itself doesn't mean that it's bad, even though the conservative thinks that things that are liberal are bad. So that word liberal is not evaluative in the strict sense, because it doesn't get defined by the words good or bad or right or wrong or should or should not. It's only evaluative in the context. It suggests an evaluation, because of the assumptions of the speaker, but it doesn't in and of itself mean that anything is bad, or good, for that matter. Because of this difference, we will call language evaluative only when it's openly and literally evaluative. So that it gets defined in terms of words like good or bad or right or wrong, and not when it's merely contextually evaluative. That is in the context given the assumptions of the speaker. This person needs to be suggesting an evaluation. If they're not openly, saying, this is good or bad or right or wrong, then, they're not really, using what language that we will call, evaluative. But there're a couple of tricky examples that are worth bringing up, okay? You might think, that if you take two good things, and put them together, it gets better. And when you add a bad thing to a good thing, it makes it worse. At least, that's the way it usually works. But notice, that when you say something's good, that suggests it's good. But when you say eh, it's pretty good, then you just added pretty, which is something good, to the word good. But, pretty good, it's not really any better than good, it might even be worse, but then you can add a negative word in the middle. huh, that was pretty darn good. Well that means it's very good, so you're actually taking a negative word darn and putting it in the middle of two positive words, pretty and good, and made something that means very good. So you really have to think carefully about exactly what the language means. It's not going to be a simple formula of adding and subtracting goods and bads to figure out whether the language is evaluative. Now another word that's surprising is the word too.
Play video starting at :13: and follow transcript13:00
I like spicy food so when I say, this food is spicy.
Play video starting at :13:5 and follow transcript13:05
That's good or, at least, it's neutral. To say it's spicy to me means I'm probably going to like it, but notice that if we just add that little word too. If I were to say this food is too spicy, that means it's bad. The little word too takes a positive evaluation or sometimes just something that's neutral and makes it bad. So the word too is actually a negative evaluative word, because it turns what was neutral or positive into something bad. It moves it in that negative evaluative direction. So it's a negative evaluative word. So is there anything wrong with using evaluative language? No, some people seem to think that you shouldn't evaluate at all that you should just describe. But they're just kidding themselves. Try going through life without deciding what's good or bad or right or wrong or what you ought or ought not to do. You can't really live your life without making evaluations at some point.
Play video starting at :14:5 and follow transcript14:05
So it's a mistake to think that evaluation is always bad. Of course, when you do evaluate, it's not like saying Yay, Duke.
Play video starting at :14:15 and follow transcript14:15
You have to give a reason. So you should think about the standards that you're applying and why they apply to this case. That's going to be your reason for evaluating the thing as good or bad. Because often going to be hard to come up with the exact standards that you're applying. Because people tend to think of things as good or bad without getting very specific about what the standards are. So you're not always going to be able to tell people what your standards are, and when you ask them, they're not always going to be able to specify what their standards are. But it's still going to be useful exercise, whenever you make an evaluation to think about why you think this thing is good or bad, or right or wrong. What are the standards that you're applying? And when somebody disagrees with you, to ask about what their standards are. So that you can understand where the disagreement is coming from. Although evaluation can be very useful and legitimate, it can also be dangerous. Because some people use evaluative terms without reasons. Let's call that Slanting. You slant when you use an evaluative word and don't give any justification for that use of the word. So you might call somebody an idiot or a queer and you're using an evaluative word or at least you take it to be negatively evaluative. And you haven't given any reason why there's anything wrong with what you're calling that nasty word.
Play video starting at :15:41 and follow transcript15:41
Now, that's slanting if you don't have any reason and that can be terribly illegitimate. When do people do it? Well they typically do it when they don't have any reason. If you don't have any reason for your evaluation you just use some nasty name like, you idiot. And, so when people start using language like that. When they start slanting then that's a good indication to you as a critic that that's the point at which their argument is probably week. Their using that kind of language to paper over cracks as I put it before in their argument. So as to hide what's the real weakness. So we can to use evaluative language in arguments, and how it gets placed at certain points to signal where the weaknesses, and the strengths, in the argument are. So now, what we've got, is we've got Argument Markers, we've got Assuring Terms, Guarding Terms, Discounting Terms, Evaluative Language. And in the next few lectures, we're going to look at a general technique that looks at all those different types of language. And uses those different categories to analyze some real passages that we found in newspapers.
Play video starting at :16:59 and follow transcript16:59
But before that, let's do a few exercises, just to make sure that you understand Evaluation.

# Close analysis
So far, we've looked at the language of argument in some detail. Because we've separated the reason markers from conclusion markers. And we've talked about assuring, and guarding, and discounting, and evaluative words. So we've picked out a lot of different words in language that play distinct roles in arguments. What we need to do for a real argument is to bring it all together and show how these types of words can work together in a single passage, and to do that we're going to learn a method called Close Analysis. And what you do with Close Analysis is you simply take a passage, and you mark the words in that passage that play those roles. So, a Reason Marker you can mark with an R, and a Conclusion Marker you can mark with a C, Assuring Term you mark with an A. a Guarding Term marked with G. A Discounting Term you mark with D.
Play video starting at :1:6 and follow transcript1:06
An Evaluative Term marked with E, and if it's clear you put a plus or a minus to indicate whether it's positive evaluation or negative evaluation.
Play video starting at :1:16 and follow transcript1:16
Now these marks will just be scratching the surface. There's obviously a lot more that you can do and need to do in order to fully understand the passage. So, when it's a Discounting Term you ought to think about which objection is being discounted. And you also ought to think about the rhetorical moves, the metaphors and irony. We'll look at rhetorical questions and we'll basically go through the passage very carefully word by word in order to figure out what's going on in that passage.
Play video starting at :1:50 and follow transcript1:50
So, how do you learn the technique? The answer is very simple. You practice and then you practice again, and then you practice, and practice, and practice, and practice. Practice won't make perfect because nothing's perfect. But practice will surely help a lot. And we'll get better and better the more we practice. So in this lecture, what we're going to do is go through one example in a lot of detail. And mark it up very carefully, in order to practice the method of close analysis. The particular example we chose for this lecture is by Robert Redford. It's an op-ed that was written for the Washington Post. We chose it because it's an interesting issue. It's about the environment. But it's not an issue that people will necessarily have very strong emotions about. Because you might not even know the particular part of the environment that he's talking about.
Play video starting at :2:45 and follow transcript2:45
We also chose it because it's a really good argument. You learn how to analyze arguments and how to formulate your own arguments by looking at good examples. Course it's fun to tear down bad examples, but we need a nice model of a good argument, in order to, see what's lacking, in the arguments that are bad. So we're going to go through an example, partly because, it's actually a pretty good argument.
Play video starting at :3:10 and follow transcript3:10
We're also going to go through this passage because it's really thick. With these argument words. So you'll see that we're marking a lot of different things and we'll have to go through it paragraph by paragraph, and sentence by sentence, and word by word, in great detail. This lecture will seem like it's looking at the passage with a microscope. and that's the point, to learn to analyze. With a microscope. The passages where people give arguments. Okay, so the first sentence says, just over a year ago President Clinton created the Grand Staircase Escalante National Monument to protect once and for all some of Utah's extraordinary red rock canyon country. Word number one. Just. Well, justice is a good thing, right? So that must be an evaluative word. No. One of the first lessons in close analysis is that simply because you have the word just, doesn't mean you're talking about justice. When he says, just over a year ago, he means slightly over a year ago, or somewhat over a year ago, or sometime over a year ago. So maybe he's guarding, you might want to mark this one as a Guarding Term, by putting a g out there. But, he's not using an evaluation. To say, just over a year ago, well why would he guard? Because, he's not very precise. He's not going to say, 17 days over a year ago, he's saying, just over a year ago, so that nobody will raise a question at this point. He does not want people raising questions this early in the op-ed. So let's keep going. Just over a year ago, President Clinton created the Grand Staircase-Escalante National Monument to protect once and for all some of the extraordinary red rock country. Okay? What about the word, to?
Play video starting at :5:9 and follow transcript5:09
Might seem like not much, because it's such a short word. But, it's actually doing a lot of work there if you think about it.
Play video starting at :5:16 and follow transcript5:16
We actually, I think, should mark it as a, an Argument Marker of some sort. Is it a Reason Marker or is it a Conclusion Marker? We'll come back to that. But first let's get clear that it's an Argument Marker of some sort.
Play video starting at :5:32 and follow transcript5:32
When he says that he created the monument to protect once and for all, he means in order to protect because he wanted to protect once and for all some of that country. It's an explanation of why he created it. It's giving you the teleological explanation which tells you the purpose for which he created it. So the bit that comes out, protect once and for all some of the country, is the reason why he created it, that explains the conclusion that he did create it. So this is a Reason Marker.
Play video starting at :6:10 and follow transcript6:10
Now the next word, protect. Well you might think that, protect is a neutral word. Because after all, protectionism is criticized by some people. But actually to protect something is to keep it safe. To keep it safe from harm, to keep it safe from bad things happening to it. So to explain what counts as protection and what doesn't count as protection, you have to cite what's good or bad. And that makes it an evaluative word. And in this case, protecting is a good thing. So it gets marked as e plus. Okay, the next words are, once and for all. What does once and for all do? Nothing. Some of these words are going to get marked as nothing whatsoever.
Play video starting at :7:2 and follow transcript7:02
Because, once and for all doesn't guard, it says once and for all, it's the absolute limit. But the next word. Some and what does that do? That guards.
Play video starting at :7:14 and follow transcript7:14
It's saying that what's protected is not all of Utah's red rock country. It's only some of it. And it's important for him to guard that, because he wants to say later on as we'll see. But there's lots of it outside the monument that's not getting protected. So he wants to guard it and say it's not all that's going to be important to his argument.
Play video starting at :7:38 and follow transcript7:38
Now, Utah is pretty neutral, unless you're from that state, then you love it and you might say that's an evaluative word. But let's skip that group of people right now. Extraordinary, what about extraordinary? Is that an evaluative word? It might seem to be an evaluative word because clearly, what Redford means is extraordinarily beautiful or extraordinarily good red rock country. But the word extraordinary doesn't say extraordinarily good.
Play video starting at :8:7 and follow transcript8:07
You can have things that are extraordinarily bad. To say it's extraordinary is to say it's out of the ordinary and the red rock country might be extraordinarily ugly. So the word extraordinary itself is not by itself an evaluative word, so it should be marked as nothing. And red rock country. Also is going to be neutral. It's beautiful stuff, but simply describe it as made out of red rock. Doesn't say that it's beautiful, even though, we all know that it is. Just look at the picture.
Play video starting at :8:48 and follow transcript8:48
So, now we finished a whole sentence! Isn't that great? A whole sentence. Oh, wow. >>Wow! >>And all we did was find six things to mark in that sentence. Well, four were marked and two were nothing. But it shows you that you can go through a single sentence. Do a lot of analysis in order to figure out what's going on and we're just getting started. Now let's move on to the second sentence. It starts in response to plans of the Dutch company to mine coal. President Clinton used his authority to establish the new monument and so on. Let's go to end response to. What does that tell you? It tells you that what's coming after it explains why president Clinton used his authority. It was a response to the plans of the Dutch company. Which means that it's an explanation. Notice that the previous explanation says why Clinton wanted to do it in general.
Play video starting at :9:50 and follow transcript9:50
This explanation tells you why President Clinton did it at that particular time rather than earlier or later. It's because he was responding to particular plans by a particular company, so the end response to is an Argument Marker. Now, is it a Reason Marker or a Conclusion Marker? Well the conclusion, the thing that is getting explained is that Clinton used his authority. So, this must be a Reason, or a Premise Marker. You can also put P for Premise Marker, or R for Reason Marker. Now, in response to plans of the Dutch company Andalex to mine coal on the Kaiparowits Plateau. President Clinton used his authority under the Antiquities Act to establish the new monument. Now this is actually a pretty tricky one. We know that the plans of the company, are the premise that explains the conclusion that Clinton used his authority. But what's the word, under doing. Well, under means, it's the Antiquities Act that gave him that authority, that explains why he had the authority. And justified him in doing what he was doing. Namely, establishing the monument. So the word under suggests that there's another argument in the background here. That the Antiquities Act gives the President the authority to establish monuments, and President Clinton used that authority. So the Antiquities Act is again a premise or as I said you can call it a Reason Marker for. The premise that the Antiquities act gives the president that authority and that justifies Clinton in using his authority or explains why he was able to abolish the monument and the word to also indicates that. What comes after it is establishing the new monument. That's what he was trying to do. That also is an argument that explains why he did it. He had the authority, but you don't always exercise your authority, right? And so the point of exercising the authority, the real reason why he exercised his authority, was. To establish the new monument. Again, it might seem tricky to keep citing the word to as an argument marker, but think about it. You can substitute in order to. He used his authority in order to establish the new monument or because he wanted to establish the new monument. And we learned a few lectures ago, that if you can substitute another Argument Marker for this particular word, then that shows that in this case, the word to is getting used as an Argument Marker, in this case, the premise. Because it's his wanting to establish the monument that explains why he used his authority. Okay? And here's a tricky one. What about the word authority? Well that's a really tricky word and sometimes it's not completely clear. How do you want to mark it? Right? You might think that this word is getting used as a discounting word. Namely, answering a potential objection. Some people might say, he didn't have the authority to do that.
Play video starting at :12:59 and follow transcript12:59
But you might think it's a positive evaluation, having authority is a good thing.
Play video starting at :13:6 and follow transcript13:06
And you might think that it's an Argument Marker because it's a reason why he would have the ability to set up. The monument, namely that he had the authority, but it doesn't actually say, openly, any of those things. So I would probably mark that as a nothing, but I think it's better just to put a question mark, because sometimes words are not going to have one clear function or another. You know we're doing our best to put them into these little bins of the different types of words. But sometimes they're not going to fall neatly into one or the other and you just have to recognize that. Of course when it comes to the quizzes we're not going to ask you about those kinds of words. But it's worth knowing that they are there. Okay? Now, let's move on. Setting aside for protection. What he described as some of the most remarkable land in the world. Again, what is that telling you? Setting aside for protection. That tells you why he used his authority to establish the monument. So again, we've got an implicit reason here. But notice there's just a space, there's no actual word that can be marked as an Argument Marker. But still, there is a separate argument here. He set it aside for the protection, that was why he established the monument. That's why he used his authority to establish the monument, if you want to include that part of the argument, as well.
Play video starting at :14:28 and follow transcript14:28
Okay. For protection. Protection again. That's going to be evaluative, right? Because to protect something is to keep it safe from harm, harm is bad, so protecting it must be good. When you explain what protection is, you're going to need to use the words good and bad, as we saw in the first sentence.
Play video starting at :14:50 and follow transcript14:50
What about these little quotation marks? I love quotation marks. You gotta watch out for 'em. What he described as some of the most remarkable land in the world, why is Robert Redford quoting President Clinton and saying how Clinton described this land?
Play video starting at :15:9 and follow transcript15:09
Because if you're trying to convince Clinton, and trying to convince the general public to try to convince Clinton. There's nothing better than quoting Clinton himself. I mean, after all, Clinton can't say I'm not an authority. Right? So those quotation marks and saying that he described it. That all amounts to assuring. He's assuring Clinton that, that has to be true, because after all, you said it yourself. And then he says, I couldn't agree more. Well, that's a different type of assuring. Remember when we saw, that, some assuring terms were authoritative. And other assuring terms were reflexive. Where quoting President Clinton is an authoritative assurance, it's citing an authority. I couldn't agree more says how much he agrees, or how much certainty he has, it certainly suggests. And so he seems to be assuring you but on a different basis. Clinton and I both agree, we might disagree about other things, but we agree about this. Which gives you some reason to be sure that it must be true. Next for over two decades the word for is sometimes an Argument Marker. Is it an Argument Marker here? No, how can you tell that? It's actually nothing here, but how can you tell that? Try substituting an Argument Marker. You can't say, because over two decades, many have fought battle over battle. It's not because, it's just saying during that period. The term for and the words after it, over two decades. Are simply being used to indicate time, not to indicate any kind of reason in this case so it should be marked as nothing.
Play video starting at :16:59 and follow transcript16:59
Many have fought battle after battle, is that a guarding term? Sometimes many is a guarding term, instead of saying all you say many. But here you say many have fought battle after battle. Nobody thinks all have fought battle after battle to keep the mining conglomerates from despoiling the country. After all the mining conglomerates themselves didn't so it can't be all. So nobody would expect the word all so in this case the word many is not functioning to guard the term by weakening. because it never started out as this strong claim all. There was nothing to weaken. They fought battle after battle. Well you might think that battles are a bad thing. So you might mark that as E minus. Because after all, conflict is a bad thing, and in battles people get hurt and try to hurt each other. So to explain what a battle is, you need to introduce an evaluative word. And what do they fight those battles for? To keep mining conglomerates from despoiling the treasures, right? Again to, can be seen as in order to, that's why they fought the battle. It explains the battle. Or because they wanted to keep the mining conglomerates from despoiling the countries. So it looks like to there is indicating the premise in an argument that explains why they fought battle after battle.
Play video starting at :18:26 and follow transcript18:26
'Kay? Mining conglomerates, is mining bad? No? Are conglomerates bad? Not necessarily. You can explain what a conglomerate is without talking about good or bad. From despoiling. Wait a minute. Now we've got an evaluative term. It's an evaluative negative term. Despoiling means spoiling things, or making them bad, and what about treasures? Treasures. Is going to be an evaluative plus term, because treasures are good things.
Play video starting at :19: and follow transcript19:00
Now, the next word of the last sentence of this paragraph, just a temporal indicator, so that's nothing. We thought, okay, thought
Play video starting at :19:10 and follow transcript19:10
means it's not really true. He's just guarding it. It's not really true that some of it was safe. We thought is was. Some of it was safe or even at least some of it was safe.
Play video starting at :19:23 and follow transcript19:23
Now that's going to be a guarding term, because it's not saying it's not saying all of it was safe, it's just a little part of it and that'll become important later in the argument. Woah. Look at this diagram. It's got letters all over the place, and they're running into each other. That shows you what close analysis does. When you start looking in detail, a lot of the different words are doing things that you can find out by trying to put them into these different categories. So, we finished the first paragraph. An entire paragraph! Oh my God! [NOISE] >> Joy!

On to the second paragraph. The first sentence is really simple, "Not so". Of course, it's referring back to the last sentence of the first paragraph, which said, now we thought at least some it was safe, and saying, no, it wasn't safe. So, what are we going to say about this sentence? Well, what about the wor- little word "so".
Play video starting at ::30 and follow transcript0:30
So, can be an argument marker. It can indicate that what follows it, is a conclusion. But is that what it's doing here? I don't think so.
Play video starting at ::39 and follow transcript0:39
As we just saw, like in, I don't think so, the word "so", can be used in many ways where it's not an argument marker, and this is saying it's not so. It's not that way. So there's no argument here, so that would get marked with a big N for nothing. Now, what about "shocking", as it sounds shocking. Well, is shocking always bad? Remember, we saw in the first paragraph, the word "stunning".
Play video starting at :1:8 and follow transcript1:08
Well, stunning stuns you, and shocking shocks you, and it's telling you that you have some kind of reaction, but it's not telling you whether that reaction is due to the thing being good, or the thing being bad. You can get shocked by something good or bad. It can be shockingly good, or shockingly bad. And so the word "shocking" by itself, doesn't indicate that it's E plus or E minus, so again, you get a nothing. I mention it only because, it's clear that Robert Redford thinks that "shocking" is bad, that this should not have happened. He's suggesting that it's bad, but the word "shocking" in itself is not an evaluative word. What about "as it sounds"? Well, he's saying that it sounds that way. He's not saying that it is that way. He's not saying that it may sound that way. He's saying that it does sound that way, which is to say, it seems that way to him. Which is not to say it really is true, so he's guarding the claim.
Play video starting at :2:12 and follow transcript2:12
He's not saying that it really is shocking. He's saying that it seems shocking, so he's guarding the claim, in order to avoid someone objecting that it's really not all that shocking after all. You say, well it sounds shocking. And in order to make that part of his argument more defensible, because it's not really essential to his argument that it's shocking or not.
Play video starting at :2:36 and follow transcript2:36
So it's supposed to be shocking.
Play video starting at :2:38 and follow transcript2:38
Clinton's Bureau of Land Management or BLM, has approved oil drilling within the monument.
Play video starting at :2:45 and follow transcript2:45
Notice, that there's no guarding at all here. He just states it. They did it. They approved oil drilling within the monument. And that's because it's not really something he's arguing for. He's actually opposed to it. It's something that his opponents might support, but he doesn't. So he doesn't want to guard it, since he wants to say it just happened as a matter a fact, that they approved it. So there's nothing that we need to mark in that particular sentence. Next sentence, BLM, or the Bureau of Land Management, has given Conoco Incorporated, a subsidiary of the corporate giant DuPont, permission to drill for oil and gas in the heart of the new monument. Well, there's a lot going on here that we could mention. You know BLM has given Conoco a subsidiary. That explains how they got permission, by siding the BLM. It's a subsidiary of the corporate giant DuPont. He's certainly suggesting that, "giant" suggested he's the small guy, you know, up against the big corporate giant. I-It might even have some connotation of corporate giants being bad, but it doesn't actually say that. And so again, "giant" should be marked as nothing. What about "permission"? To say that someone's permitted to do something, is to say that it's not wrong. That's what permitted means. Now of course, if you're talking about a legal permission? Then to say that it's permitted, is to say that's not legally wrong. It's not forbidded by law. It still might be morally wrong, but at least it's legally permitted; means it's not legally forbidden. And so if forbidden and wrong are evaluative words, to deny them and say it's not wrong, looks like an evaluative as well. But one of the interesting things about this evaluative word, is it's not clear whether it's positive or negative. It means it's not wrong, but that don't mean it is good or is right. It simply means it's not forbidden. So it's not clear whether to put plus or minus. So I'll just leave it as a plain E in that case, okay? Now, what did they have permission to do? To drill for oil and gas in the heart of the new monument, okay? That's what the permission was a permission to do. The word "to" there is not being used as an argument marker in this case, because you can't say, they get permission in order to, right? What they gave them permission to do, was to drill, okay? What about "drill"? Well, clearly Robert Redford doesn't want them to drill, so he thinks that's bad, but he donen't say that's bad. He just calls it "drilling". .And they're drilling for oil and gas. Well a lot of people think that oil and gas are good things, but they don't say here that they're good. They're simply saying that they're oil and gas. The coolest part of this sentence ,I think, is that metaphor at the end. I mean, you got this image that there's this, this, poor monument, and somebody's drilling right in it's heart. You know, like what could be crueler, than to drill in the heart of a young monument. The poor innocent thing. So this metaphor of the heart, is a nice rhetorical device, that fits with the drilling, and is building up people's opposition to what Redford wants them to be opposed to, but it doesn't actually give an argument. It's just stating it in a flowery or metaphorical way, that'll get their feelings going, okay? You may wonder, notice he doesn't say, you do wonder. He says, you may wonder. So this is, tell me? A guarding term, so you should mark it with G. You may wonder, as I do, "as" is sometimes used as an argument marker, but here you're not saying that you wonder because I do, or I wonder because you do. The word "because" can't be substituted for as. So to say "as I do," is simply to conjoin the two and say, you wonder and I also wonder or you may wonder, because I don't know whether you are or not, and I do. And what we wonder is, how can this happen? Now, we have a rhetorical question. How can this happen? Well, that's obviously suggesting, it shouldn't have happened. Now, how could something have gone so wrong, as it did in this case? But he doesn't actually say that. He simply asks the rhetorical questions, and that's really the trick of rhetorical questions. Notice there are a bunch of them here. Wasn't the whole purpose this? Didn't the president say he was doing this? Then these three sentences in a row, are all rhetorical questions. So what's the trick of rhetorical questions? The point of a rhetorical question, is to get you to give the answer. If I say, how can this happen? And someone thinks to themself, well the government messes up all the time. Then you've got that audience member who answered the question, to be saying it themselves. And there's nothing more forceful in an argument than to get your audience to say it themselves, when you don't have to say it. And that's the trick of a rhetorical question. And what Redford's doing here, is putting three of 'em right in a row, so that you'll have to go along with him three times in a row. And then, that obviously has an effect on your feeling, like you're with him, or you feeling like you agree with him. That's the effect he's trying to create by using these rhetorical questions. Okay, what's the whole purpose of creating? Notice, the whole purpose is to preserve. That phrase "the whole purpose," goes with it, because we say the purpose is to preserve. And there as before, in the previous paragraph, we're signaling an explanation, because if you want to explain why Clinton created the monument, then the answer was, to preserve the colorful cliffs and sweeping arches and so on. So, this is going to be an explanation, and to say, that's the purpose, is to say that, you created it because you wanted to preserve, or in order to preserve. Then this whole purpose, marks the conclusion, and the "to preserve" marks the premise. And we have a little argument. He wanted to preserve his colorful cliffs, therefore he created the monument. And we've got the conclusion marked by the whole purpose, and the premise, or the reason, marked by the word "to," okay? Preserve, we've already seen a word a lot like that, namely "protect". And we saw that when you protect something, it has to be good. Preserved also means, to preserve it against the things that would harm it. If harms bad, then preserving and protecting against harm must be good. So we can mark that as E plus. It's colorful cliffs, "colorful" sounds good, but of course colorful just means it's colorful. Sweeping arches, broad and sweeping in curves; well that sounds good. It sounds beautiful, the way he describes it. And it surely is, as you can see in any picture,
Play video starting at :10: and follow transcript10:00
but sweeping doesn't itself say its good or beautiful, or so on. Another "extraordinary"; we already saw extraordinary. So colorful, sweeping, and extraordinary, they're certainly being used here by Redford, to suggest that these are good, but they're not openly saying they're good. So we don't want to mark those as evaluative words. But resources, that resources are things that can give you abilities. When you have more resources, you are able to do more. So abilities sounds like a good thing, and resources are the things that make you more able. They give you more freedom and more power, so at least, many people would want to mark that as an E plus word. Some of these are going to be questionable. They're not as obvious as others, so I'm suggesting one way of interpreting this passage, and I hope you're following along? But if you have some questions about the particular cases, that's going to be natural. It's partly because our language is not totally precise, okay? Large scale mineral development; well that's not bad if it's done in the right places, so I don't think that's evaluative either. Didn't the president say that he was saving these lands? Well didn't the president say, that he was saving these lands? Well that suggests that he's assuring you, that in fact, he was saving these lands.
Play video starting at :11:23 and follow transcript11:23
He should know whether that's what he was doing, since after all, that's what he, you know, did himself, so he should be able to say what he did and why. Didn't the president say he was saving? Saving, could be marked as E plus just like protect and preserve, because it saves it from something bad happening; these lands from mining companies for our children and grandchildren. Now, what about the word "for"? This explains again, why he's saving these lands. He's saving them for our grandchildren and children. That means, the reason for saving these lands, is to benefit our grandchildren and children. So "for" is going to be a reason or a premise marker. It marks the reason or premise that justifies saving the lands, and explains why in fact the president did want to save the lands, okay? So now we're through with paragraph two and I hope you're kind of getting the feel for how to do close analysis. And so what I want to do now, is give you a chance to practice the skill on your own. We'll put up paragraph three. Mark certain words, and your task in the exercise will be, to put the right letter next to, or to indicate, the function of that word in the paragraph. And the letter you put, should be: either R or P for
Play video starting at :12:57 and follow transcript12:57
premise marker, C for conclusion marker, A for assuring, G for guarding, D for discounting, E plus/ E minus for positive and negative evaluation. And you can go through the third paragraph yourself, in the exercise.

# More close analysis
Welcome back. Now, you've done paragraph three yourselves and we're going to go on to paragraph four. It might seem like we're doing an awful lot of this but remember, the only way to learn close analysis is to practice, practice, practice, practice, practice. Over and over again, on as many passages as you can find. So, we're going to spend one more lecture going through paragraphs four and five of Robert Redford's piece in the Washington Post from 1997. The title was A Piece of God's Handiwork. Paragraph four starts, sounds like Washington double-speak to me. What is it that sounds like Washington double-speak to him? It's the sentence at the end of the previous paragraph that you analyze. And that's the claim that they issued the permit without a full review, using an abbreviated review, and they didn't even look at the leases on other federal lands.
Play video starting at :1:3 and follow transcript1:03
So, he's saying that sounds like the kind of thing Washington does, when they double speak. Double speak's obviously a metaphor, right? It's a metaphor for saying one thing to one person another thing to another person or sometimes saying one thing that seems to mean one thing when what they really mean is another thing. But however, you interpret the metaphor double speak, it's not good so we can indicate that double speaking is a negative evaluation. And it's a, a metaphor, but clearly negative in its meaning. You wouldn't say someone who's speaking properly is double-speak. Notice, however, that he has this phrase sounds like, and it sounds like it to him. What's sounds like doing? Well, he's not saying that it is Washington double-speak. So, he's guarding it, he's weakening the claim, he's not saying it is, he's saying it sounds like. And so that can be labeled as a guarding term. Okay. So, he's guarded that claim but now, he's going to go on and argue against the plan that Washington was using.
Play video starting at :2:21 and follow transcript2:21
I've spent considerable time on these extraordinary lands for years. I've spent, for years, let's just circle that whole thing to indicate that whole phrase. because it's all doing the same thing. What's it doing? It's assuring you. You see, because I have spent so much time on these lands, I spent so many years on them, you can trust me to know what's going on. I've got the evidence. Notice, like other assuring terms, it's not giving you the evidence. It's saying, you're to trust me because I've got the evidence. I've had the experience. So, it's a perfect example of assuring because it's saying that he has reasons without actually giving the reasons. And that's why you can't question his reasons because you haven't spent considerable time on those extraordinary lands. And of course, he follows that up with another assuring term he says, and I know, you say I know. That's an assuring term. A mental assuring term because it's describing the mental state as being one of knowledge. Knowledge implies truth and to say I know it is to imply that it's true to assure you that it's true, 'kay? And what does he know? He knows that an oil rig in their midst. Would have a major impact. Now, what about that a major impact, okay? Now,
Play video starting at :3:44 and follow transcript3:44
he's clearly saying it would be a bad impact but does he come out an say it's bad no he just says it's major, okay? So, it's not evaluative term that would be labeled as nothing if nothing is an option. So, clearly suggesting that it's bad but he's not saying it. So it shouldn't be marked as an evaluative term, okay? Next, what's more? Well, what's more is kind of a conjunction. But what came before this was an argument that it would have a major impact based on his assurance. And so when he says, what's more, he's suggesting that what's going to come next is yet another argument for why we shouldn't have these, these permits issue. He's going to tell you other bad things about them. So, that can be a premise marker because what comes after it is the premise.
Play video starting at :4:35 and follow transcript4:35
They want to drill to find oil. Well, we can say to find oil, it's in order to find oil that is going to explain why they want to drill. It's a teleological explanation as we saw in an earlier lecture. And so that is going to be a reason marker because their desire to find oil Is what explains their desire to want to drill, okay? Inevitability. What's that? Assuring. It's assuring you that it's obviously true. There's no way around it. It is inevitable. What's inevitable? More rigs, more roads, new pipelines, toxic wastes and bright lights would follow to get the oil out, okay? He's assuring you, that all of those things are going to happen. The previous argument before the what's more was simply an oil rig. Notice it's just an oil rig, one oil rig up there in that sentence. But now we've got more rigs, more roads, new pipelines. So, if an oil rig has a major impact, all of this other stuff's going to have a lot more of an impact. That's the point of the what's more. He's adding additional reasons why the permits should not be issued, 'kay? And they would follow. That means it's going to follow, what? In time. It's just temporal. It's not saying, anything more than it's going to follow at a later time but they're going to follow, to get the oil out. That explains why they would follow because, right? You would need them in order to get the oil out. So, that's going to be an argument marker itself. Is it a reason marker or is it a conclusion marker? Well, the conclusion is that all that's going to follow, right? And the premise is that it's needed in order to get the oil out. So, this is going to be a premise marker.
Play video starting at :6:36 and follow transcript6:36
And the conclusion is that you get all that stuff, the pipelines the roads the waste and so on, okay? So those are his reasons against giving a permit. And then he says the BLM couldn't see this, okay? Just states it as a fact, but. What's the but doing there? Remember what kind of word a but is? But is a discounting term. He's answering an objection. The objection is, well, you say all that would follow but the BLM would disagree with you and they looked at it very carefully and they're an authority or an expert. So, the answer to that objection is, the U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service and the Environmental Protection Agency, did see this. Notice that what comes after the but is more important than what came before it. What he's doing is saying that there's a contrast between what the BLM couldn't see and what the U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service and the Environmental Protection Agency did see. But in addition to the contrast between those two he's also saying it's more important that the U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service and the Environmental Protection Agency did see it, okay? So, what comes after the but is taken to be more important.
Play video starting at :7:58 and follow transcript7:58
And what did they see? Both of these agencies recognized, recognize implies you can't recognize things that aren't true. You know, if you see somebody and you'd say I recognize my sister and it wasn't your sister. You didn't really recognize them. So, to say you recognize is to assure people that it's really true. The devastating, now devastating can't be good so that's e minus.
Play video starting at :8:25 and follow transcript8:25
Effects of extensive oil drilling. Extensive is that bad? No, extensive oil drilling's good in the right places. Gives us the kind of energy we need to be able to accomplish the goals that we want. Maybe you'd wish you didn't need extensive oil drilling. But, if you need it, then it's good, when it's done in the right place. And that drilling would have a, devastating effects on this area. And then those two agencies urged the BLM to refuse to allow it, okay? Why? In order to protect the monument. And again, we've seen this kind of argument repeatedly at several points during this particular op-ed. That's saying that the goal is to protect the monument and that's what justifies urging the BLM to refuse to allow it. So this is going to be a premise marker. We've seen an order to protect, an order to preserve because we want to protect and so on. He keeps repeating that. That's not a bad thing. Many times when someone's giving an argument, they repeat pretty much the same words as in other areas because they're giving several arguments for a single conclusion. We'll actually see how those different reasons can fit together in the next section of the course, but for now all we're doing is marking the words in an order to, as a premise marker. We finished four paragraphs! Alright! We're almost done! Yes! Now, we're on to paragraph five, and it starts, maybe the problem comes from giving management responsibility for this monument to the BLM. What about the word, maybe? The word maybe is about as clear a case as you can get of a guarding term. It's saying, it might be the case, it might not be the case, I'm not going to definitely claim that's where the problem comes from. I'm just suggesting that maybe so somebody comes along and says, that's not really true. I, I'm going to say, well, j, maybe it's true. It's all I was claiming. And so I'm now able to defend my premise, okay? Problem, what about problem?
Play video starting at :10:38 and follow transcript10:38
Gotta be e minus, right? Another clear example, because you can't have good things, if there are problems. Sure you can have problems on math tests that are good but that's not the kind of problem we're talking about here. These kinds of problems are bad and so that word gets marked as e minus.
Play video starting at :10:58 and follow transcript10:58
So, the problem comes from namely, is explained by giving management responsibility for this monument to the BLM. So comes from can get marked as a premise marker. It's the giving management responsibility to the BLM that explains why there's a problem in the first place. And that could be put in the form of an argument, that explanation could.
Play video starting at :11:26 and follow transcript11:26
Okay. So, why is giving management responsibility to the BLM create a problem? Because the next sentence tells you this is the BLM's first national monument, the first time they've ever done this. Almost all the other monuments are managed by the National Park Service, okay? Nothing wrong in itself with being the first. There always has to be a first. So there's nothing evaluative there. What about almost all? Clearly guarding, right? Because it's not all, it's almost all. So the claim is more defensible.
Play video starting at :12:2 and follow transcript12:02
Almost all the others are managed by the National Park Service.
Play video starting at :12:7 and follow transcript12:07
The park service's mission is to protect the resources under its care, okay? Protect good, resources good. So those both get e plus. While, what about the word while? It's not completely clear. You could read this as simply setting up a contrast between the park services mission and the bureau's mission. But you could also read it as responding to an objection. Well, doesn't the government protect those resources? And the answer is well, the park service does but the bureau has a different role. The bureau has always sought to accommodate economic uses, okay? So, if you read that while as but and you replace it with but it seems to make sense. The Park Service's mission is to protect, but the bureau has always, it looks like you can replace it with the discounting term, which means that while is functioning here as a discounting term, okay? The bureau has always saw it, no guardian there, it's always sought that, right? To accommodate economic uses of those resources under it's care.
Play video starting at :13:23 and follow transcript13:23
Even so, starts the next sentence, what is even so doing? Well, even so, is a discounting term because it's discounting an objection.
Play video starting at :13:37 and follow transcript13:37
The objection is, well, they've always sought to accommodate those uses, well, then how do you explain the fact that they got off to such a good start? They seem to be, okay? They seemed to be. That's a guarding term. It's not saying they were. It's saying they seemed to be getting off to a good start. Good, boy there's an evaluative plus. You can't beat that for a clear evaluative plus. To a good start by enlisting broad public involvement in developing a management plan for the area. Well, what was good about it? They enlisted broad public involvement. Therefore, it was good. Looks like by enlisting could be a premise marker. The premise is, enlist, they enlisted broad public involvement. Therefore, they got off to a good start. Yet. Whats yet? Another discounting term. The agency's decision to allow oil drilling in the monument completely undercuts this process just as it is beginning. The objection is, so if they go off to a good start whats the problem if they listed broad public involvement, whats the problem?
Play video starting at :14:50 and follow transcript14:50
Well, that's the objection and the response is now they've decided to allow drilling in the monument. And that completely undercuts the process that did enlist public involvement, right? So, the yet is just counting the objection that says there's no problem here, they're doin just fine, they've got broad public involvement. They're saying the response to that objection is but now they have not got public involvement. They're doing it without a complete review and so on is mentioned in the preceding paragraph.
Play video starting at :15:25 and follow transcript15:25
The agency's decision to allow oil drilling in the monument completely no guarding, right? Completely undercuts when it's that strong a word like completely, you can almost say it's I'm assuring you it's not just partially undercutting, it's completely undercutting. That's a way of, of making you confident that it really does, at least partially, undercut the process. And undercuts sounds like something bad. I suppose you might not want to mark it as evaluative because, you know, you could undercut a bad process and that would be a good thing. So, literally you probably should not mark that as evaluative, but it's clear what Robert Redford thinks about undercutting this process. And now just. Just stands for justice, doesn't it? No, remember from the very first word of this op-ed. Just is nothing here. It means at the same time when it was beginning. It's not an evaluative term, even though just sometimes means something about being just or fair or good, here it doesn't mean that at all. So, we're back to the very word that we began this op-ed with and so that seems like a good place to stop. I'll stop marking here. There are other things you could mark, there are others things to discuss. These paragraphs, these op-eds are always extremely complex and interesting to try to get the details straight. But I'll give you a chance to look at the next three paragraphs. They're all pretty short. Look at those paragraphs and see if you can do a close analysis on those. Because as I've emphasized several times, the best, indeed the only way to learn close analysis is to practice, practice, practice, practice, practice.
