# Validity
We can do close analysis, we can identify the premises and conclusions, we can put them in standard form, what's next? Well, the next step is to take those parts and put them in a certain order and fill in the missing gaps. We need to learn how to reconstruct arguments. Are you ready? Well there are lots of way to reconstruct. Think about constructing a house, or building.
Play video starting at ::41 and follow transcript0:41
In order to construct a good building, you got to know what the goal is, what the standards of a good building are. The same thing goes for reconstructing arguments.
Play video starting at ::50 and follow transcript0:50
In order to reconstruct an argument properly, we need to know what the standards are for reconstruction. We're trying to reconstruct it, so as to meet those standards. Because the goal is not to reconstruct the argument in order to make it look bad. The point is going to be to reconstruct arguments, so as to make them look good. because by making your opponents look bad or silly, that doesn't do anybody any good. If you want to learn about their perspective, and you want to learn from, their views. Then you need to reconstruct their argument, so as to make it look as good as possible. And to do that,you need to know about the standards for arguments, that is the standards that make arguments good or bad.
Play video starting at :1:35 and follow transcript1:35
So what we're going to do this week, is we're going to look first at some standards for arguments, validity and soundness in particular. And then we're going to use those standards to develop a method, called reconstruction or deep analysis. I'll explain those terms later.
Play video starting at :1:55 and follow transcript1:55
And then we're going to apply that method to a few concrete examples. In order to be able to take a passage, and take those premises and conclusions and fill them out and get a full fledged argument. That, if we've done it properly, will be as good as it can be and that we can learn from. That's the goal. Now, because an argument consists of premises and a conclusion. And the premises are supposed to be related in the right way to the conclusion, there can be two main ways for an argument to go wrong. Two main vices of argument you might say.
Play video starting at :2:28 and follow transcript2:28
The first is there might be something wrong with the premises. In particular, they might be false, or at least one of them might be false.
Play video starting at :2:37 and follow transcript2:37
Second, there might be something bad about the relation between the premises and the conclusion. The premises might fail to give a good reason for the conclusion. Now, each of these problems is something that we need to avoid. And when we do avoid them, we get the corresponding virtues, namely, validity and soundness. And those are the two notions that we want to discuss in this lecture, and the next. Let's begin with the relation between the premises and the conclusion.
Play video starting at :3:9 and follow transcript3:09
What kind of relation between the premises and the conclusion is good for an argument or makes an argument good? Well, that depends. Some arguments are deductive, and others are not. So let's focus for a moment on deductive arguments. In Deductive Arguments, the conclusion is suppose to follow from the premises. What does that mean? I mean, what does it mean for a conclusion to follow from the premises? That's a really hard notion to pin down. So what logicians usually do and what we're going to do, is focus instead on the notion of validity. And the idea is that a deductive argument is trying to structure itself, so that it's valid. And we'll explain what validity is. But for now, I want to emphasize that we're only talking about deductive arguments. There's going to be another class of arguments called inductive arguments that we'll get to later in this course. Where, they don't even pretend to be valid. They don't even pretend that the conclusion follows from the the premises.
Play video starting at :4:13 and follow transcript4:13
But just for simplicity, let's focus on deductive arguments now. And the idea is that the deductive argument, should be structured in such a way that it's valid.
Play video starting at :4:26 and follow transcript4:26
Then the next question is, what's validity? Let's start with a simple example. Suppose that you know Mary, but you don't know her children.
Play video starting at :4:37 and follow transcript4:37
However, you do know that she has one child who is pregnant, and you also know that only daughters can become pregnant. So, you have all that you need to know in order to draw further conclusion. Mainly, Mary has at least one daughter.
Play video starting at :4:59 and follow transcript4:59
So here's the argument. Mary has a child who is pregnant, only daughters can become pregnant, therefore, Mary has at least one daughter. Now, if you think about it, there's just no way, no possibility that both of those premises are true and the conclusion's false. That is the feature that we're going to call Validity. More generally, we can define validity in an argument. so that an argument is valid, if and only if it's not possible for the premises to be true and the conclusion false.
Play video starting at :5:42 and follow transcript5:42
That is, it's not possible for there to be a situation where both of those hold. That is, a situation where the premises are true and the conclusion is also false. Now that, might strike you as a pretty simple notion. But actually that little word possible is the problem. How do you tell what's possible or what's not possible? Well, there's not mechanical solution to that, and we'll struggle with that a little bit throughout this course. But for now, since we're right at the start, let's think of it this way.
Play video starting at :6:14 and follow transcript6:14
Is there any way for you to tell a coherent story, where the premises are true, and the conclusion's false. Can you describe a situation with that combination of truth values? That is, the premises being true, and the conclusion falls in the same situation. If you can tell a coherent story with that combination, then it's possible and the argument's not valid. But if there's no way to tell a coherent story. Where the premises are true and the conclusion's false, then the argument's valid.
Play video starting at :6:49 and follow transcript6:49
Now let's try that test on our example.
Play video starting at :6:52 and follow transcript6:52
Mary has a child who is pregnant, only daughters can be pregnant, therefore, Mary has a daughter. So, is there any way to tell a coherent story where the two premises are true. That is, where Marry has a child who is pregnant, and only daughters can be pregnant. But the conclusions false, Marry does not have a daughter. Well just try, suppose Marry has only one child and it is a son.
Play video starting at :7:24 and follow transcript7:24
There the conclusion is false, good. What about that? But then, is that son pregnant? Well, if the son is not pregnant then the first premise is false. Mary doesn't have a child who is pregnant. But if the son is pregnant somehow, don't ask me how, but if the son is pregnant, then the second premise is not true. It can't be true that only daughters can be pregnant because this child is a son.
Play video starting at :7:55 and follow transcript7:55
Okay, what if Mary has two children? Try that. Try to tell the story that way. Mary has a daughter and a son. Now, she's got a child who is pregnant, the daughter. And only daughters can be pregnant, but she has a son. Wait a minute, she's got a son and a daughter. So now the conclusion's true. Because she does have a daughter even though she also has a son. Well, oh wait, how about this one? What if Mary has a child who is biologically female, but sees himself as a male. And so she sees that child as a male, but that child is pregnant, because after all, they're biologically female.
Play video starting at :8:42 and follow transcript8:42
Now, are the premises true and the conclusion false? Does that story make sense? Wait a minute. Either, her child is a daughter or her child is a son.
Play video starting at :8:56 and follow transcript8:56
Now, if it's a daughter and it's pregnant, no problem,the conclusion's true.
Play video starting at :9:2 and follow transcript9:02
If it's a son, because that child sees himself as a male, then you've got a choice.
Play video starting at :9:11 and follow transcript9:11
Well, what about the first premise? The first premise is going to be true, she does have a child who is pregnant. But what about the second premise, only daughters can be pregnant. Wait a minute, if that really is a son, if we're going to call that a son, then, it's no longer true that only daughters can be pregnant.
Play video starting at :9:27 and follow transcript9:27
So, now the second premise is false. So, try it again. Try it with, you know, sex changes and try it with hermaphrodites, tell the story any way you want about Mary's children. And there's no way that both premises come out true when the conclusion's false. That shows that the argument is valid. It might be just that we can't imagine the coherent story which makes it invalid. But the fact that we've tried hard and looked at all the possibilities we can think of. At least gives us a good reason to think, that this argument is valid. Now, some people like to think of it in the reverse direction.
Play video starting at :10:10 and follow transcript10:10
They say, let's imagine that the conclusion's false, and then, if it has to be the case that at least one of the premises is false, the argument's valid. Then you could define validity as, it's necessarily the case that if the conclusion is false, one of the premises is false. Or, in every possible situation, if the conclusion's false, one of the premises is false. We can apply this new account of validity to the same old example. It's got to be the case. That if Mary didn't have a daughter, then she doesn't have a child who was pregnant or else, there are at least some children who are pregnant who are not daughters. So in other words, this case you're reasoning back from the falsehood of the conclusion to at least one of the premises has to be false. Where as in the earlier definition, you were saying it's not possible in the situations where the premises are true for the conclusion to be false. You can look at it either way, either direction. Just pick the one that works for you and go with that definition. Because in the end, the two definitions are equivalent. It's just a matter of what's going to help you understand which arguments are valid and which ones are not.
Play video starting at :11:26 and follow transcript11:26
In addition to understanding what validity is, it's also very important to understand what validity is not. A lot of people get confused by the notion of validity in this context, because they're thinking that, to call an argument valid, must be to call it good, right? You call a driver's license valid. When its good in the eyes of the law, but that's not what we're talking about here. The notion of validity is getting used by logitions here as a technical notion. And its very, very, very important to remember, that to call an argument valid is not to call it good.
Play video starting at :12:3 and follow transcript12:03
For some arguments like deductive arguments, being valid might be necessary for them to be good, but it's not enough. And we'll see a lot of examples of that later on. The second point about what validity is not, is that validity does not depend on whether the premises and the conclusion are actually true or false. Instead, it depends on what's possible. Whether there's a certain combination, true premises and a false conclusion, that's even possible.
Play video starting at :12:34 and follow transcript12:34
So, whether the premise is actually true in the actual world is not what's at issue. And we can see this by seeing that some arguments with false premises can still be valid. And some arguments with true conclusions can be invalid. So let's look at some examples of that.
Play video starting at :12:56 and follow transcript12:56
Indeed, there are four possibilities, because remember, the conclusion could be true or false, and premises, could be all true or at least one false. So, we've got four possibilities, and all of those are possible, except for one. The one combination that's not possible for valid arguments is True Premises and a False Conclusion. But if you've got True Premises and a True Conclusion, it might be valid, it might not. If you've got false premises in a true conclusion, it might be valid it might not. If you've got false premises, and a false conclusion, it might be valid it might not.
Play video starting at :13:40 and follow transcript13:40
So, let's look at some examples of each of those possibilities in order to better understand the relation between premises and conclusion, that exists when the argument is valid. It's hard to give examples with true premises and false conclusion, or any of these other combinations. When the truth is controversial. So we're going to have a really simple example, and we're going to start just by stipulating what the facts are. We're going to assume that all Ford cars have four tires, but some Ford cars do not have four doors. We're also going to assume that Henry's car is a Ford that has four doors. And Jane's car is a Chrysler, it has only two doors, not four doors. And we're just going to take those facts for granted and assume that that's the situation we're talking about. And then, we can give examples of all the combinations that we discussed before.
Play video starting at :14:44 and follow transcript14:44
Let's begin with true premises and a true conclusion. Here's an example, all Ford cars have four ties. Henry's car is a Ford.
Play video starting at :14:56 and follow transcript14:56
So Henry's car had, has four tires. Are the premises true? Well yeah, our assumptions tell us that all Ford cars have four tires. And then Henry's car is a Ford. What about the conclusion, is that true? Sure. That's another one of our assumptions. Henry's car has four tires.
Play video starting at :15:16 and follow transcript15:16
But, the fact that the premises are true and conclusion's also true, doesn't yet tell us it's valid. Because, to be valid, it has to be impossible for the premises to be true and the conclusion false. There has to be no coherent story where the premises are true and the conclusions false. So what about this case? Is it valid? Well, is it possible? Is there any way to tell a coherent story where, all Ford cars have four tires? Henry's car is a Ford, but Henry's car does not have four tires just try. One way to tell not going to able to do it, is to reason backwards. Assume that the conclusion falls, that Henry's car does not have four tires, may be it got six tires. Well, then, how could both premises be true? If Henry's car is still a Ford and it has six tires, then the first premise is not true. Because the first premise says that all Ford cars have four tires, and Henry's car would then under that assumption be a Ford car without four tires, but with six tires instead. So the first premise would be false.
Play video starting at :16:27 and follow transcript16:27
Well, another possibility is that Henry's car has six tires and it's not a Ford. And then you can have the first premise true, all Ford's have four tires. But you couldn't have the second premise true, namely that Henry's car is a Ford. So there's no way when the conclusion is false, for both premises to be true and that shows you that the argument is valid. Nonetheless, there are other examples where the premises are true and the conclusion's true, but the argument is not valid. Instead it's invalid. Here's an example of that combination. All Ford cars have four tires. Henry's car has four tires. Therefore Henry's car is a Ford. Now in this new argument, are all the premises true? Yes, the first premises says, all Ford cars have four tires. And that's true by our assumption, the second premise says Henry's car has four tires. And that's also true by our assumptions. And is the conclusion true? Yes, our assumptions also tell us that Henry's car is a Ford. But, is it possible, is there any way to tell a coherent story where, those premises are true and the conclusion is false. Yes, absolutely. All that has to happen is Jane and Henry switch cars. Then, the first premises can be true, because all Ford cars have four tires, and the second premise is going to be true. Because Henry's car has four tires, of course now it's a Chrysler, because he got it from Jane.
Play video starting at :18:11 and follow transcript18:11
But the conclusion can be false Henry's car is not a Ford, because Ford and Chrysler are different companies. So if he switches cars with Jane and he has a Chrysler, then he doesn't have a Ford. He's car is not a Ford, okay? So now you've got a situation, where the premises are true, and the conclusion false. It's not an actual situation, but it's a possible situation. You can tell a coherent story, where the premises are true, and the conclusion's false. And that tells you that the argument is invalid. Next, let's consider an example with false premises and a true conclusion.
Play video starting at :18:50 and follow transcript18:50
Premise one, all Fords have four doors. Premise two, Henry's car is a Ford.
Play video starting at :18:57 and follow transcript18:57
Conclusion, Henry's car has four doors. Is the first premise true? No, it's not true that all Fords have four doors.
Play video starting at :19:7 and follow transcript19:07
Our assumptions tell us that.
Play video starting at :19:10 and follow transcript19:10
Second, is Henry's car a Ford? That's true.
Play video starting at :19:15 and follow transcript19:15
So one of the premises is false and the other one is true. That means they're not all true, and the conclusion, is that true? Yes. It is true that Henry's car has four doors. But remember, the fact that, that's actually the case doesn't tell us whether or not it's valid. So is it valid? That depends on when it's whether it's possible for the premises to be true and the conclusion false.
Play video starting at :19:40 and follow transcript19:40
Premises aren't actually true, but is there a possible story that you could tell that would be coherent. Where the premises are true but the conclusion, false. That's the test of validity, so lets apply it to this case. Well, just imagine that the conclusion is false. That, Henry's car does not have four doors, it's only got two doors. Then, there is really only two possibilities, Its either a Ford or it is not a Ford. If it is a Ford then the first premise is false. It is not true that all Fords have four doors.
Play video starting at :20:18 and follow transcript20:18
But if Henry's car is not a Ford, then the second premise is false, because it says that Henry's car is a Ford. So there's no coherent way in which it could possibly be true. That both of these premises are true and the conclusion's false. So this argument's valid, and notice that that shows, that an argument can be valid, even though it's got a false premise. Now, you might be thinking to yourself, this is crazy. How can an argument be valid, when one of its premises is false? I mean, an argument is not good when it's premises are false. But notice what that does.
Play video starting at :20:56 and follow transcript20:56
That confuses the notion of valid, like in a valid drivers license, where to be valid is good, with the technical notion of validity that we're using here. The technical notion of validity that we're using here, has to do with the relation between the premises and the conclusion. And in particular it has to do with possibilities. And not with the actual falsehood of the premise. So what we have to ask ourselves is, what would happen if it really were true?
Play video starting at :21:26 and follow transcript21:26
That all Fords have four doors. It's not true, in the actual world, but we're concerned with possibility. And if all Fords did have four doors, and, if Henry's car was a Ford, then it would have to have four doors. So that possibility of the premise being true, even though it's not, is what's crucial for determining validity.
Play video starting at :21:54 and follow transcript21:54
Because it's not possible for the premises to be true and the conclusion false. That makes it valid in our technical sense even if it's not valid in the common sense notion of validity as goodness. We're not saying the arguments are good argument, we're saying that is meets this technical definition of validity that logicians use. Now the only combination of truth values in premise and conclusion, that you cannot get with a valid argument. Is to have true premises and a false conclusion. So here's an example of that. Premise one, some Ford cars do not have four doors. Premise two, Henry's car is a Ford. Conclusion,
Play video starting at :22:40 and follow transcript22:40
Henry's car does not have four doors.
Play video starting at :22:43 and follow transcript22:43
The premises by our assumptions are both true, and the conclusions false. And it's not valid, because it's easy to see how it might be possible for the premises to be true and the conclusion false. It's simple. Even if some Fords don't have four doors, Henry's car is one of the Fords that does have four doors. And then, both the premises can be true, and the conclusions false.
Play video starting at :23:8 and follow transcript23:08
So that's how you can get an invalid argument with true premises and a false conclusion. But you don't even really need that. Look, every argument that has true premises and a false conclusion has to be invalid. Because if it does in fact actually have true premises and a false conclusion, then it's possible for it to have true premises and a false conclusion. So you can know right off the bat, that every argument with true premises and a false conclusion is invalid. What you can't know is for the other combinations, then you have to think through what's possible, instead of simply, what's actual. We haven't been through all of the possibilities, but we have seen that you can have invalid arguments with true premises and true conclusions. And you can have valid arguments, with false premises and true conclusions. And we've got a little table that shows us the other possibilities. Instead of going through all of those possibilities myself. I think it would be better if you did a few excercises, and that'll make sure that you understand this notion of validity, before we go on and try to show how validity is related to soundness.
Welcome to Week Three. In weeks one and two, we already learned a lot about how to identify and analyze arguments. Play video starting at ::11 and follow transcript0:11 We can do close analysis, we can identify the premises and conclusions, we can put them in standard form, what's next? Well, the next step is to take those parts and put them in a certain order and fill in the missing gaps. We need to learn how to reconstruct arguments. Are you ready? Well there are lots of way to reconstruct. Think about constructing a house, or building. Play video starting at ::41 and follow transcript0:41 In order to construct a good building, you got to know what the goal is, what the standards of a good building are. The same thing goes for reconstructing arguments.

# soundness
The next question has probably been bothering you ever since very early on in the previous lecture.
Play video starting at ::8 and follow transcript0:08
Namely, if valid arguments can have false premises, then what good are they? Sure, there's this technical logician's notion of valid argument, but why should we care whether arguments are valid if valid arguments can be really bad?
Play video starting at ::27 and follow transcript0:27
Validity might be necessary for an argument to be good or at least for deductive argument to be good. Because remember, there are also inductive arguments, but even though it's necessary, it's not enough. You can have a horrible argument that's still valid. The great thing about validity is that when a valid argument has true premises, then you get something that really is reliable, namely, soundness.
Play video starting at ::55 and follow transcript0:55
Because if you know that the premises are true and you also know that it's not possible for the premises to be true and the conclusion false, then you know the conclusion must be true.
Play video starting at :1:9 and follow transcript1:09
So in a sound argument the conclusion has to be true. And that is what makes it valuable, because if we can get a deductive argument to be sound, then you really got something. What you've got, is a true conclusion. Officially then, a sound argument is one where the premises are true, and the argument is valid.
Play video starting at :1:32 and follow transcript1:32
And we've got the same combinations of truth and falsity as possibilities that we had in valid arguments. You can have both premises and conclusion are true and then if it's valid, the argument's sound. And if it's not valid, it's not.
Play video starting at :1:50 and follow transcript1:50
Or you can have, the premises are true and the conclusion's false. And then it can't be valid. But if it's invalid, it's not sound.
Play video starting at :1:59 and follow transcript1:59
Or you can have, the premises are false and the conclusion's true. And then if it's valid, it's not sound. And if it's invalid it's not sound. We can have both the premises and the conclusion are false. And then it's not going to be sound whether it's valid or not. So the only combination where it's sound is when the premises are true and the argument is valid and in that case you know that the conclusion is true. What about lack of soundness? Well, there are two ways for an argument to fail to be sound, mainly either the argument can be invalid or whether its premises can be false. So it's a lot easier for an argument to be unsound.
Play video starting at :2:45 and follow transcript2:45
And we know that a deductive argument tries to be valid and of course it wants its premises to be true. So a deductive argument is trying to be sound. When it fails to be sound, it's not going to be any good.
Play video starting at :2:59 and follow transcript2:59
Now the next question is, how can you know?
Play video starting at :3:2 and follow transcript3:02
If you don't know whether the premises are true, you're not going to know whether the argument is sound. Well, not quite. Because if you, if the argument's valid and you know it's valid, then you don't know whether it's sounds unless you know the premises are true. But if you know the argument's invalid, you already know it's unsound. Even if you don't know whether the premises are true. So if you think about it that shows why you want to be able to test for validity, because if you can show the arguments is invalid, then you're going to be able to say, well I know it's unsound regardless of what you think about whether the premises are true or not.
Play video starting at :3:41 and follow transcript3:41
So there's going to be some value to validity. Namely, if you can show it's invalid, you're going to show it's unsound, and that means that the deductive argument didn't get what it wanted.
Play video starting at :3:52 and follow transcript3:52
So validity is going to be necessary for soundness, and soundness is going to be important because it guarantees the truth of the conclusion. And then validity derives it's value from the fact that if it's not valid it's not sound. Okay, now there's a lot more to say about validitiy and we'll say a lot more about validity when we get to formal logic in the second part of this course, but for now we're just going to stick with this pretty intuitive notion of validity and see how we can use this notion of validity to reconstruct arguments.

# Basics of reconstructing arguments
Now that we understand validity, we can use the notion of validity in reconstructing arguments. Now the point of reconstructing an argument, is to put it in a shape that makes it easier for us to assess the argument more accurately and fearly for whether it's a good argument or a bad argument.
Play video starting at ::21 and follow transcript0:21
And when you do the reconstruction remember you want to make it as good an argument as possible, because you don't learn anything by putting down your enemies by making them look silly. Right? If you want to learn from somebody else's argument, you need to put it in the best shape you can to make it look as good as possible.
Play video starting at ::39 and follow transcript0:39
So, that's going to be the goal of reconstruction and we're going to accomplish that goal in a series of stages. The first stage is simply to do a close analysis and we talked about that last week. The second stage is to get down to basics and is to remove all the excess words and focus on the premises and conclusion that really make up the argument and then put those into standard form.
Play video starting at :1:3 and follow transcript1:03
The third stage is to clarify those premises. They're not always going to be as clear as you like, and that's going to take some work, and it's going to include breaking them into parts. And then the next stage is to take those parts and organize them, to put them in order, so you can see how the argument flows from one part to another. But not all arguments are complete. So the next stage, we have to fill in the gaps. That is, supply suppressed premises.
Play video starting at :1:31 and follow transcript1:31
And once we've done that, then the final stage is going to be to assess the argument. If we are able to come up with a sound reconstruction, we know that the conclusion has to be true. Because. As we learned in the previous lecture, the conclusion of sound arguments is always true. But if we don't come up with a sound reconstruction, then we've got to decide is it the fault of the argument or is it our own fault because we didn't come up with a sound reconstruction when there really is one that we didn't find. So that's going to be something we have to discuss. We're going to discuss all of these stages over the next few lectures. Now, the first stage of reconstruction is to do a close analysis, but we already learned how to do that. That was easy. Boy, hope the rest of them are that easy. This lecture is mainly going to be about the second stage namely getting down to basics. And what we want to do is to pull out the explicit premise and conclusion from all the other words around it. And the first step is to remove all the access verbiage. You know, it might seem really surprising, but people often repeat themselves. I'm sure you've all run in to it. I mean, listen to somebody give a talk, and it takes them 50 minutes to say what they could've said easily in five minutes. And one of the reasons is that they say everything 10 times. You know, for instance, people often say the same thing twice. They repeat themselves. They say the same thing over again. And they restate the same thing in different words. They utter sentences that mean the same thing and they say something and you know, then they say it again, and they make a claim twice or more. They assert exactly what they just said, and they reformulate their claim in different words that are equivalent. They say it once, and then they say it again. You get the idea.
Play video starting at :3:21 and follow transcript3:21
Now here's a real example from a U.S, politician during a debate. I want to be honest with people. We can't eliminate this deficit. People have heard that over and over again in four years. We cannot do it. We're in too deep a hole. Now, if you think about it. It's going to be obvious that we cannot do it. Repeat, we can't eliminate this deficit. because that's what doing it is, eliminating the deficit. But also, we're into deep a hole. Well that's just a metaphorical way of saying the same thing. Why is the hole too deep? because we can't get out of it. What hole is it? It's the deficit hole, so to say we can't get out of this hole, we're in too deep a hole is just another way of saying we can't eliminate the deficit, so in these three lines he's already repeated himself three times. Now why does this politician repeat himself? It might be that he thinks people will remember it better or that one version will make more sense than another. But he might have a special reason because this was a live debate and he had to give a 90 second answer. So he had to fill up the time. Sometimes people repeat themselves just to fill up the time or maybe to give himself time to think because he didn't have a real answer ready yet. And repeating himself is easy while he thinks about what he's really going to say in the next few sentences.
Play video starting at :4:51 and follow transcript4:51
Fine, but repeating it still doesn't make the argument any better. And, we want to get down to the basics of the argument. That is, the parts of the argument that really effect how good it is. So we can cross out those repetitions that don't make the argument any better. So first, we can cross out we cannot do it. Then we can cross out we're into deep a hole. We already saw that those are just repeating the claim that we can't eliminate the deficit. In addition, we can cross out I want to be honest with people because that's not a reason to believe that we're in too deep a deficit. And, next, we can cross out, that people have heard that over and over again in four years. Well, that might be seen as a reason to believe that we're in a deficit, because everybody seems to say it, but, let's assume that's not part of his argument here and we'll cross it out. Now, let's move on. A second form of excess verbiage. That is, words that don't contribute to the force of the argument, is what I like to call road markers. A lot of times, people, you know, good speakers. They tell you what topic they're talking about, and why they're talking about it. Why it's important, and worth talking about. But to say why it's an important issue. And to say what issue it is. Doesn't provide any reason to believe that what they say about the issue is true or false. So it doesn't contribute to the argument. Here's an example from the same politician in the same debate as we just saw.
Play video starting at :6:30 and follow transcript6:30
This politician said. Now I want to go back to the whole issue of health care because we touched it and I think the American people deserve to know what we would do different. Now notice, he says he's going to talk about healthcare but, he doesn't say anything about healthcare he doesn't tell you what he's going to say about healthcare. All he says he wants to go back to that issue and he tells you why he wants to go back to that issue. But he doesn't add any reason to believe that what he's about to say about the issue is true. Now this can of course still be useful because. You might get confused about what the issue is. And he might be changing the topic and he wants to signal that he is changing the topic. And that'll help his listeners. But it still doesn't add to the argument. It doesn't give you any reason for the conclusion that he is going to want to draw. We can cross out these excess words. We can cross out, now I want to go back to the whole issue of healthcare. Because that doesn't show that his views on healthcare are correct. And we can cross out, because we touched it. That's a reason why we're going to that issue. But again, that doesn't give any reason why his views are correct. And we can even cross out that I think the American people deserve to know. But we would do different. Because the fact that they deserve to know what you're going to do doesn't show that what you're going to do is the right thing to do. So none of these claims are really reasons. They're going to be reasons for the main part of his argument. Which is to support the particular views on healthcare that he's going to tell you about, a few seconds after this.
Play video starting at :8:10 and follow transcript8:10
The next type of access verbiage is tangents. People go off on tangents all the time. Here is an example.
Play video starting at :8:19 and follow transcript8:19
You know, you really ought to think about taking a history course. I, I still remember my history courses in college. [UNKNOWN] There's this one time when. There's a dog that one of the students brought to class and, and the dog like barked and then he ran up on stage and he, he cut under the professor and knocked the professor on his rear end, it was really funny. So you know I think that history is a good thing to study. Now notice that all this stuff about the dog has nothing to do with history. It's no reason to take a history course instead of a philosophy course, or a classics course, or a science course. The same thing could happen in those courses just as well. So, the tangent plays a certain role. It makes it interesting, it keeps your attention, maybe it makes it memorable for you, what he said, but it doesn't actually provide a reason why, you ought to take a history course. So, since those parts of the words were just a tangent, that don't provide any reason we can cross them out too because they are excess verbiage. But sometimes people go off on irrelevant not just by accident because they lose their train of thought, but because their trying to fool you. They're trying to produce what's called a red herring, the, the name red herring supposedly comes from somebody who crossed the red herring over the trail and then the hounds couldn't track his scent any more. And that's basically what's going on here. Sometimes people produce tangents that distract you from the main line of argument, because they know that their weakness in that line of argument and they don't want you to notice them. That's what a red herring is and its a type of tangent that you have to learn to watch out for. Because if you want to see the problems in your opponent's arguments or even in your friend's arguments, then you need to not get distracted by tangents that are in a fact, red herring.
Play video starting at :10:24 and follow transcript10:24
Yet another example of excess verbiage is well, examples. Here's an example. Of that.
Play video starting at :10:33 and follow transcript10:33
A different politician, in the same debate said this, here's what's happened; in the time that they have been in office, in the last four years, 1.6 million private sector jobs have been lost, 2.7 million manufacturing jobs have been lost. And it's had real consequences in places like Cleveland. Cleveland is a wonderful, distinguished city that's done a lot of great things, but it has the highest poverty rate in the country. One out of almost two children in Cleveland are now living in poverty.
Play video starting at :11:12 and follow transcript11:12
Then notice that this politician is talking about the unemployment rate in the rest of the country, in the country as a whole. So why bring in Cleveland? Well, you might be saying that Cleveland shows that there's problems throughout the rest of the country but that can't be right because. Cleveland's just one example. And it might be an outlier that doesn't represent the general trends. So what he's really doing with this example is, he's trying to bring it down to home. And make you feel for the real effects. But he doesn't come out and say that you can generalize from Cleveland to the rest of the country. Or that everyone else is suffering in exactly the same way. He's just giving one example. And so, it doesn't really support his general claim, that the unemployment is a problem throughout the whole country.
Play video starting at :12:2 and follow transcript12:02
That means, that it's not an extra premise in the argument, and we can cross it out like other forms of excess verbiage. Now we've seen that excess verbiage can take the form of repetition. Road markers, or tangents, or examples and people use these alot. Matter of fact, I'd like to think of a general trick that people use called the trick of excess verbiage. A lot of people talk too much, and they keep saying things over and over again, go off on tangents, and give more examples than they really need, and all of that is a way of hiding the problem with their position. It's a trick to use too many words, because, the real point gets lost in the middle of those words,
Play video starting at :12:53 and follow transcript12:53
so you can fool people by throwing in those extra words. That's the trick of excess verbiage.
Play video starting at :13: and follow transcript13:00
But, be careful. What seems like excess verbiage that's just there to trick you might really be an essential part of the argument. So what you need to do when you have a passage and you're trying to get the argument out of it is to cross out all of the excess words, but also look at what's left over. If what's left over is enough premises and conclusion to make a good argument then this stuff that you crossed out probably really is excess. But if it turns out that what's left over is not a very good arguments, you ought to check all those words you crossed out and make sure they really weren't necessary, because you're not being fair, to the person that you're interpreting, if you crossed out something that was an essential part of the argument.
Play video starting at :13:47 and follow transcript13:47
And some cases, are going to be tricky. It's not going to be clear whether or not to cross them out.
Play video starting at :13:55 and follow transcript13:55
Some small words that are tricky are guarding terms. Here's an example. I think Miranda is at home, so we can meet her there. What's the guarding word? You already found that out when you did the close analysis. Right? I think.
Play video starting at :14:10 and follow transcript14:10
Now one way to read this argument is, that the premise is I think Miranda is a home, and the conclusion is we can meet her there.
Play video starting at :14:19 and follow transcript14:19
But that's kind of weird, because the fact that you think she's at home is not what makes it true that you can meet her there. It's the fact that she is at home that it can make it the case that you can meet her there. So if the premise is about what you think and the conclusion is about where she is, and where you can meet her. And the argument doesn't make any sense. So, in this case, what we want to do is to cross out the words I think because that's going to make the argument look silly. And the argument really amounts to Miranda is at home, so we can meet her there, and the I think covers that whole thing. It's saying, I think she's at home, so I think we can meet her there. But the argument doesn't involve some premise about what your thoughts are. And contrast this with a different argument. Miranda's at home, so we can probably meet her there.
Play video starting at :15:9 and follow transcript15:09
Now, there's another guarding term. Right? Probably.
Play video starting at :15:13 and follow transcript15:13
Can you get rid of that? Well then, the argument becomes. Miranda is at home, so we can meet her there. But that's clearly not the speaker was trying to say. If they included the word probably, they'll realize that the fact that she's at home right now doesn't mean that we can meet her there because it might take us a while to get there. And she might leave while we're on the way.
Play video starting at :15:34 and follow transcript15:34
So its not fair to the person giving the argument and it makes the argument look worse, to cross out the word probably. So in that case you want to keep the guarding term, in order to properly represent the force of the argument. So it looks like sometimes, you need to keep the guarding terms. And sometimes, you need to cross them out. And there's not going to be any strict rule that you can follow. You have to use your sense of what's going to make the argument as good as possible. What's going to fit what the speaker was really trying to say? Another tricky case is assuring term.
Play video starting at :16:12 and follow transcript16:12
Suppose I'm writing a letter of recommendation and I say, he is clearly a great worker. I know that, so you ought to hire him. The assuring terms are clearly and I know that.
Play video starting at :16:27 and follow transcript16:27
But now the question is, is the argument really first premise, he's clearly a great worker. Second premise, I know that. Conclusion, you ought to hire them. It's kind of weird again if you think about it, because you're not hiring him because its clear. If he's a great worker but it's not clear that he's a great worker, then you still ought to hire him because he's still a great worker. Or if he's a great worker and I don't know he's a great worker, you still ought to hire him because he's still a great worker. The fact that I know it is irrelevant to whether you ought to hire him because that's about my mental states not his abilities.
Play video starting at :17:5 and follow transcript17:05
So that representation of the argument doesn't really capture the force of somebody who writes this letter of recomendation.
Play video starting at :17:12 and follow transcript17:12
So we can cross out the words I know that and we can cross out clearly and then the argument is, he's a great worker so you ought to hire him. But contrast this example, I am certain that Jacob is cheating on his wife,
Play video starting at :17:29 and follow transcript17:29
so I ought to tell her. Now you might think I am certain that is just another assuring term, so we can cross it out. And then the real argument is Jacob is cheating on his wife, so I ought to tell her. But now think about that argument. The mere fact that he's cheating on his wife doesn't mean I ought to tell her if I'm not certain. because if I have some suspicions or I'm just guessing but I really don't know then I probably ought not to tell Jacob's wife that, you know Jacob is cheating on her. So here the force of the argument does seem to depend on my certainty. If I'm not certain I shouldn't tell her. If I am certain maybe I should. So we can't cross out the assuring term in this case, because that would distort the argument. Now, of course, some people might disagree with that. They might say, well look, if you have some reason but you're not certain you ought to tell her. And that can be controversial. But we're talking here not about what those people think, but what, the speaker thinks, the person giving this argument, when this person said, I'm certain that Jacob is cheating on his wife, they seem to indicate that to them, the fact they're certain provides an even better reason, why he should tell Jacob's wife. So, if we want to capture what the person giving the argument intended. In this case, we have to leave in the assuring term. So we've seen one example where you ought to get rid of the assuring terms. And another example where you ought to keep the assuring terms. And just like with guarding terms, the same point applies, there's no mechanical rule that'll apply to every case. You have to think through the argument and decide whether crossing out those words and removing them distorts the argument or instead crossing them out makes the argument look even better. Because the point of removing excess verbiage is to get rid of the things that aren't necessary, but keep everything that is necessary to make the argument look as good as it possibly can look. Finally, once we've removed all the excess verbiage, what's left over? The answer is, the explicit premises and conclusion in the argument. The point of removing the excess verbiage was to separate those essential parts of the argument, those basics of the argument from, all the stuff that's unnecessary. Of course, we still have to decide which ones are premises and which one is the conclusion. Right? And that's why the close analysis helps because we indicated which ones were reason markers and which ones were conclusion markers, and that lets you identify that these are the premises and that's the conclusion, and so now, we can do step three, we can put the argument in standard form. We put the premises above the line. And we put dot pyramid and then the conclusion below the line. And we've got the argument in standard form. Which completes stage two of the reconstruction project. At this point, it's useful to look back at the passage, and see whether you've gotten rid of all the excess included, all of the basics of the argument. So you can look at the passage and say is everything that's not crossed out in a premise or a conclusion of the standard form. And if there's something that's still there in the passage that isn't used you got to decide at that point, is it really excess or not.
Play video starting at :20:58 and follow transcript20:58
And of course If the argument looks really bad you've gotta look back and see whether it's missing something that you had crossed out as being excess verbiage when it really was an essential part of the argument. So we can use this process of putting it into standard form as a test of whether we've performed properly the other step of getting rid of excess verbiage. So steps, two and three really work together in this stage two of getting down to basics. That's what helps us to use the different parts to see whether we've done each of them properly.

# Sharpen edges
We're right in the middle of reconstruction. We did stage one last week, because that's just close analysis. In the previous lecture, we did stage two, which is to remove excess verbiage and to put the explicit premises and conclusion into standard form. And this lecture is going to focus on stage three. Which is to clarify the premises, and to break them up where possible, without distorting them. Let's start with step 4, which is to clarify the premises and the conclusion when it's needed. So we might need to clarify them, just in order to make them easier to understand. Or to make them less likely to mislead. And. All that sounds pretty good. So let's try on this example.
Play video starting at ::46 and follow transcript0:46
It was hot today, so it will probably be hot tomorrow again. Now we need to clarify that. What exactly counts as today? Is that you know, the time when there's daylight? Well, does it also include night? Even though night is not day. And what exactly do we mean by hot? How hot was it today? And how hot will it be tomorrow? And what, after all, is heat? And what about, it'll probably be hot tomorrow? Probability. That's a tough notion. We're going to spend a whole week on that later on in the course. There are different kinds of probability. I want to know what kinds you're talking about here and when you ask, for example about, will it be hot tomorrow? What is, what is will mean? It means it's going to happen in the future. And what exactly is the future and is the future real, is time real? You can go a long way towards asking how to clarify that argument.
Play video starting at :1:47 and follow transcript1:47
But that's ridiculous. You know, we don't have to clarify a simple argument like, it was hot today, so it will probably be hot tomorrow. And it's lucky we don't have to clarify every word in the argument because you couldn't. After all when you explain one of the words or give a definition for it, its going to be in terms of other words, and they have to be clarified and you will never get to the end of it.
Play video starting at :2:12 and follow transcript2:12
The search for perfect clarity and absolute precision is impossible. You will never complete that search. You will never find perfect clarity or absolute precision. So give it up. What we should seek is not absolute precision but adequate precision, not absolute clarity but adequate clarity and that means that we ought to try to clear up those parts of the premises and conclusions that are likely to produce confusion later. You have to be able to kind of predict, whether this part of the argument needs to be clarified, because people are going to get confused by it. Now, that's not going to be easy, and there's no simple or mechanical rule to tell you what needs to be clarified and what doesn't need to be clarified. The only way to learn this skill. Is to go through some examples that'll give you models of what needs to be clarified and what done. Sometimes the unclarity lies in a single word. In the 1980s, Nancy Reagan used to say, "Just say 'No' to drugs". What does that mean? Well, she is telling you not to use drugs. To say no when somebody offers you drugs or tries to tell you to use drugs. So in effect she's saying, you ought not to use drugs.
Play video starting at :3:34 and follow transcript3:34
That's pretty clear, but now what does she mean by drugs?
Play video starting at :3:38 and follow transcript3:38
Does she mean Aspirin?
Play video starting at :3:42 and follow transcript3:42
I don't think she's telling me not to use Aspirin? Does she mean prescription drugs? I don't think she's telling me not to follow the advice of your doctor and use the prescriptions that the doctor told you to take.
Play video starting at :3:55 and follow transcript3:55
So that can't be what she means. Well maybe she means illegal drugs.
Play video starting at :4:1 and follow transcript4:01
Okay. Maybe she means illegal drugs. What about heroin or cocaine? Yes, that's what she's telling you not to do. She's definitely telling you not to take illegal drugs.
Play video starting at :4:13 and follow transcript4:13
But then there's somethings in the middle. She might be telling you not to take dangerous drugs, whether they're illegal or not. What about. Nicotine. What about alcohol? Those are both dangerous drugs. At least when you used to excess, alcohol is very dangerous and smoking can lead to lung cancer and that's how most people get nicotine. So maybe she's telling you not to take nicotine or alcohol in addition to illegal drugs like heroine and cocaine. Now it's not clear. So how do we clear it up? Well, you want Nancy Reagan's claim to look as good as possible. Remember, you're always trying to make the argument look as good as possible. And one way to make it look good is to make your claim no more than she has to claim. So, she could be claiming that in addition to heroin and cocaine, you shouldn't take alcohol and nicotine, but probably or at at least more [INAUDIBLE] she's telling you not to take illegal drugs. She had to choose between interpret her as saying don't take any illegal drugs and don't take any dangerous drugs. And it seems like the more charitable interpretation that makes her claim look more plausible is don't take any illegal drugs. So we could clarify her claim, just say "No" to drug, by interpreting it to mean you ought not to take any illegal drugs. So in general then, the lesson is. That, when there are options about how to clarify a certain sentence, we ought to pick the most charitable option that makes the claim look as good as possible.
Play video starting at :5:54 and follow transcript5:54
Here's another example, where the unclarity can be traced to a single word, but in this case it's the word that, and it's not clear what it refers to. So imagine that someone argues like this. They say, she claims that our strategy won't work because the enemy knows our plan. But that is a big mistake.
Play video starting at :6:17 and follow transcript6:17
What is that refer to? That could refer to, that is the word that could refer to,
Play video starting at :6:26 and follow transcript6:26
that the enemy knows our plan. Someone says, that's a mistake, they might be saying it's a mistake to think that the enemy knows our plan, but it could refer to the claim that our strategy won't work. They could be saying it's a mistake to think our strategy won't work or they could be saying, but the mistake is to think that the enemy knowing our plan, is enough to make it not work.
Play video starting at :6:51 and follow transcript6:51
They might be saying, it's not that it won't work because the enemy knows the plan. Or, here's a fourth possibility.
Play video starting at :6:59 and follow transcript6:59
They could be saying, that is a mistake to think that she claims that. That's not what she claims.
Play video starting at :7:5 and follow transcript7:05
So, there're four different ways to interpret this argument.
Play video starting at :7:11 and follow transcript7:11
And in order to figure out how to interpret it we have to figure out, which of those is most likely as an interpretation of what the arguer is trying to say. And that's going to depend on which one makes the argument look the best. Now in this example, it's not clear which interpretation is the best because someone might give that argument in a context where they're saying the mistake is to think she claims that, but in other cases they might be saying that the mistake is to think that the enemy knows our plan. They don't really know our plan. And in other cases, they might be claiming that other things, you're mistaken. So, we need to figure out what the person is saying, but that could depend on the particular context and might vary from context to context. Now, these unclarities seem unintentional. But sometimes people use unclarity. To hide problems with their argument. To try to fool you. So imagine a politician says, we need to stop our enemies and stand by our friends. So we must remain strong and resolute.
Play video starting at :8:18 and follow transcript8:18
Well, if somebody starts arguing like that you ought to be asking yourself. Who do they think our friends are? Who do they think our enemies are? What do they mean, stop our enemies? Are they calling for military action? How do they think we ought to stop our enemies? And standing by our friends, does that mean we ought to support them no matter what they do? There're lots of questions that you would want to ask to clarify exactly which claim is being made before you accept something like this. Heres another claim that might be made by an opponent of a first politician. "We have to help the needy," wait a minute.
Play video starting at :8:57 and follow transcript8:57
Which people are needy? I mean everybody needs something. How needy do you have to be to be needy? And, we ought to help the needy? Well, how are we going to help them? Does that mean we just give them whatever they want? Or, what are we supposed to give them, and when are we supposed to give them, and how much are we willing to spend on giving it to them? Politicians on both sides of the political spectrum make vague claims that need to be clarified. Before you should be willing to endorse one or the other of those claims. If you try to decide, what to believe before you know exactly what the claim means, before you've clarified it, you could end up committing yourself to all kinds of nonsense and all kinds of very problematic positions. You could get yourself into a lot of trouble. That's why we need to clarify the terms in arguments.
Play video starting at :9:49 and follow transcript9:49
Now, one special way in which premises need to be clarified, is that they need to be broken up into smaller parts, where you can do that. And the point of this is that the smaller parts are going to be easier to understand, and easier to access whether they are true or not. So step 4, clarify the premises, belongs together with step 5, break up the premises into parts. What needs to be broken up? Well, the explicit premises and sometimes the conclusion, as well. Here's a simple example.
Play video starting at :10:23 and follow transcript10:23
That shirt looks great on you and it's on sale. So you ought to buy it. We might put that in standard form like this. That shirt looks great on you and, it's on sale, is the premise. And the conclusion is, you ought to buy it. But notice, that the premise has two parts, joined by an and. So, we could break them up. And have the first premise, that shirt looks great on you, and the second premise, it's on sale. And then the conclusion is, you ought to buy it. Breaking it up like that is supposed to make it easier to asses the premise for truth or falsehood. Now in this case it doesn't make it much easier, because it was so simple to begin with, but we'll see that breaking up premises will really help when we get to more complex examples.
Play video starting at :11:15 and follow transcript11:15
So, it makes sense to break up premises. Well, at least sometimes. We should not break up premises when breaking them up distorts the argument. Here's an example of that.
Play video starting at :11:29 and follow transcript11:29
We still need to add either one more cup of white sugar or one more cup of brown sugar to complete the recipe, so we've gotta add another cup of ingredients.
Play video starting at :11:41 and follow transcript11:41
Then one way to represent that argument would be to say that premises, we still need to add either one more cup of white sugar or one more cup of brown sugar and the conclusion is, we have another cup of ingredients to add.
Play video starting at :11:55 and follow transcript11:55
But we could break it up because it's got parts. We could change the argument into, we still need to add one more cup of white sugar. That's the first premise. And the second premise is, we still need to add one more cup of brown sugar and then the conclusion is, we have one more cup of ingredients to add, but that argument doesn't make any sense. If we've got to add one of white and one of brown, we don't just have one more cup of ingredients to add. And as always, we're supposed to be making the argument look good. And that change made it look bad. And the problem is that here, we broke up the word or. Because it's one cup of white or one cup of brown. And presumably you didn't know which it was or maybe you had a choice between the two. But you weren't suppose to both. That would be too much. And the word or signals that. So, in general, you should not break up, when the word that joins the two is or, but it's okay to break up when the word that joins the two is and. You still gotta be careful about context, it's not always going to work that way, but as a general rule. You know, that usually works. Other cases are even trickier. One particularly problematic case is dependent clauses.
Play video starting at :13:14 and follow transcript13:14
Here's an example.
Play video starting at :13:16 and follow transcript13:16
Nancy finished all her homework because all she had to do was write 25 lines of poetry, and she wrote two sonnets which have 14 lines each. The dependent clause is, which have 14 lines each. And the question is, how do we fit that into standard form? Well, here's one stab. The first premise can say, all she had to do is write 25 lines of poetry. And the second premise can be, she wrote two sonnets which have 14 lines each. And then the conclusion is, Nancy finished all her homework. Now the question is, can we break up that second premise into two different parts, and it seems like we can. We should be able to represent the argument so the first premise is, all she had to do was write 25 lines of poetry and the second premise says she wrote two sonnets, and the third premise says sonnets have 14 lines each, and the conclusion is, she finished all her homework. In this case, breaking down the premise actually helps us understand and assess it. Because we can decide whether it's really true, for example, that sonnets have 14 lines each. That's going to be a question. If the answer is no, then the argument might fail. If the answer is yes, at least for standard sonnets, so the argument looks pretty good. Contrast that example with this one.
Play video starting at :14:37 and follow transcript14:37
Our legal system isn't fair, because authorities go easy on white collar criminals who have been allowed to get away with their crimes in recent years. Well the premise could be authorities go easy on criminals who have been allowed to get away with their crimes in recent years, and the conclusion is our legal system isn't fair.
Play video starting at :15:1 and follow transcript15:01
Now the question is can we break up that first premise. because it has that deep ended clause who have been allowed to get away with their crimes in recent years. Well, that depends. Because the person giving the argument might be saying that authorities go easy on all white collar criminals. And they might be saying, that authorities only go easy on a certain subset of white-collar criminals. Namely, the subset that have been allowed to get away with their crimes in recent years.
Play video starting at :15:31 and follow transcript15:31
If the premise is about all white-collar criminals, then we can break it up.
Play video starting at :15:35 and follow transcript15:35
So that one premise says, authorities go easy on white-collar criminals. And the next premise says, white-collar criminals have been allowed to get away with their crimes in recent years.
Play video starting at :15:49 and follow transcript15:49
But if the arguer is only talking about some white-collar criminals. And admits that other white-collar criminals have not been allowed to get away with their crime. He's only saying that. Authorities go easy on those white-collar criminals who have been allowed to get away with their crime. That subset of white-collar criminals and then it would distort the argument to break it up, because if you do break it up, then that second premise says white-collar criminals have been allowed to get away with their crimes in recent years. And if some of 'em haven't, then that premise turns out to be false.
Play video starting at :16:25 and follow transcript16:25
So if you break it up, you can criticize it by pointing out that it doesn't really apply to all white-collar criminals. But if you leave it as a single premise, then it's not subject to that criticism. So, if you want to be charitable. You probably ought to keep this premise together, unless you know on independent grounds, that the person was making that claim about all white-collar criminals, and not just a subset. So, to make that argument look better, we don't break up the premise. And the general lesson is that with dependent clauses like that, and which, and who. You have to look very carefully to figure out what the speaker wanted to say and what's going to make their argument look best and use that information to determine whether or not to break up the premise. There are no airtight rules as always, so we needed a few exercises to practice this skill.

# Organize parts
Welcome back. We've covered stages one through three of argument reconstruction. Namely, close analysis, get down to basics, and sharpen edges. In this lecture, we'll cover stage four. Which is organized parts. because it's not enough to isolate the parts and figure out what they are. You need to show how they fit together in a structure, so that they work together to support the conclusion of the argument.
Play video starting at ::32 and follow transcript0:32
To see how this works, let's start with an example.
Play video starting at ::36 and follow transcript0:36
Consider this example. That fertilizer won't help the roses bloom, because there's already a lot of nitrogen in the soil. So the fertilizer will make the nitrogen levels too high. Of course, so is a conclusion marker. So one conclusion is that, the fertilizer will make the nitrogen levels too high.
Play video starting at ::57 and follow transcript0:57
And then you might think that one might have put the argument into standard form goes like this. Premise one is, that fertilizer won't make the roses bloom. Premise two is, the nitrogen levels in the soil are already high. And then the conclusion is, that the fertilizer will make the nitrogen levels too high. But that doesn't really make any sense if you think about it. How could the fact that the roses won't bloom, be a reason to believe that the nitrogen levels are too high?
Play video starting at :1:28 and follow transcript1:28
This couldn't be a reason for that, so we must have the wrong structure. However, there's another argument marker. This time it's a premise marker. Because.
Play video starting at :1:40 and follow transcript1:40
And that indicates that the claim that there's already a lot of nitrogen in the soil is a premise, but what's the conclusion for that premise. That's supposed to show that the fertilizer won't make the roses bloom.
Play video starting at :1:55 and follow transcript1:55
So we've missed that part of the structure. If we put it in standard form the way we first thought. The trick here is that there is really two conclusions.
Play video starting at :2:5 and follow transcript2:05
One conclusion is that the fertilizer won't help the roses bloom. And another conclusion is that the fertilizer will make the nitrogen levels too high, but each argument is supposed to have just one conclusion.
Play video starting at :2:20 and follow transcript2:20
So how are we going to put this into a structure? The solution is that there are two arguments. One is that the nitrogen levels in the soil are already high. Therefore, adding the fertilizer will make them too high. And the second argument is that. Adding the fertilizer will make the nitrogen levels too high. Therefore, the fertilizer will not make the roses bloom.
Play video starting at :2:48 and follow transcript2:48
Now notice that one argument really builds on the other, because the conclusion of the first argument is really a premise in the second argument.
Play video starting at :2:59 and follow transcript2:59
So we can represent them as two separate arguments, but we can also put them together in a chain. So that the argument says, the nitrogen levels in the soil are already high, therefore adding fertilizer will make them too high. And therefore, adding fertilizer will not help the roses bloom.
Play video starting at :3:22 and follow transcript3:22
Now, if we take that whole structure, and we try to represent it in a diagram, and we represent each premise with a number. Which is the number that was given it in the standard form, then we can simply have premise one. With an arrow to premise two indicating that premise one is a reason for premise two. And then another arrow going from premise two to premise three to indicate that two is a reason for three.
Play video starting at :3:53 and follow transcript3:53
In a way, we've got two premises and two conclusions because, that one claim in the middle, number two, operates as a conclusion in the first argument, and premise in the second argument.
Play video starting at :4:5 and follow transcript4:05
But overall, I hope the diagram makes it clear why I want to call this a linear structure. When you have one premise giving a reason for a conclusion, which is then a premise for another conclusion. Then they form a line when you diagram them in the way that I'm proposing.
Play video starting at :4:22 and follow transcript4:22
Arguments can have other structures too. In particular, sometimes there's more than one premise associated with a single conclusion. And this can happen in two ways. The first we're going to call the branching structure. And the second we're going to call the joint structure.
Play video starting at :4:40 and follow transcript4:40
Here's an example of the branching structure.
Play video starting at :4:44 and follow transcript4:44
I'm not going to go to the movie with you because I don't like horror flicks. And besides, I'm too busy. The word because is a premise marker. So that indicates that the conclusion is that I'm not going to go to the movie with you. And there are two premises. One is I don't like horror flicks, and the other is I'm too busy.
Play video starting at :5:7 and follow transcript5:07
Now you might think that, that could just be put in the old linear structure that we already saw. But then the argument's going to look like this.
Play video starting at :5:15 and follow transcript5:15
I don't like horror flicks therefore, I'm too busy, therefore, I'm not going to go to the movie. But wait a minute. The fact that I don't like horror flicks doesn't mean I'm too busy. That doesn't make any sense. Oh, maybe it's the other way around. I'm too busy, therefore, I don't like horror flicks, therefore, I'm not going to go to that movie with you.
Play video starting at :5:39 and follow transcript5:39
That didn't make any sense either. The fact that I'm too busy isn't why I don't like horror flicks. The problem is there are two premises here, but neither one is a reason for the other, as we saw on the linear structure. Instead, in this branching structure, each premise is operating independently. There's one argument. I don't like horror flicks, therefore I'm not going to go to that movie with you. There's another argument. I'm too busy, therefore I'm not going to go to that movie with you. And each premise by itself is a sufficient reason not to go to the movie with you. I mean just think about it. If I wasn't too busy but I didn't like horror flicks, I wouldn't go to the movie. But if I liked horror flicks but I was too busy, then I still wouldn't go to the movie. So each premise itself, is enough and they operate independently.
Play video starting at :6:28 and follow transcript6:28
That's what makes this a branching structure, instead of a linear structure.
Play video starting at :6:33 and follow transcript6:33
Lets diagram it and you will see why we call it a branching structure. One way to diagram it would be simply draw an arrow between premise one and conclusion two, and then there's a separate argument, so you draw another arrow from one star, another premise to conclusion two. And that's okay, but notice that it doesn't show you that both premises are reasons for the same conclusion. So to capture that aspect of the structure, that both premise one and premise one star support the same conclusion, namely two, it's better to diagram it so that. There's an arrow that runs independently from both premises to a single instance of conclusion two, as you see in the diagram on the screen.
Play video starting at :7:23 and follow transcript7:23
And that should show you why we're calling it a branching structure, because it kind of branches, it looks like the branches of a tree. Okay, it doesn't really look like the branches of a tree, but you get the idea. We're going to call it a branching structure. Next, we have to separate this branching structure from what we're going to call the joint structure. The difference is that in the branching structure the premises provide independent support for the conclusion. Whereas in this joint structure, they work together. And they're not going to have force independent of each other. It's like the joint in your leg. Which joins together the calf with the thigh. And if you didn't have both, it wouldn't work very well. So we're going to call it a joint structure. Here's an example.
Play video starting at :8:8 and follow transcript8:08
For my birthday, my wife always gives me either a sweater or a board game. This box does not contain a sweater. So, this time she must have given me a board game. Now notice that the argument marker, so, indicates that the conclusion is this time she must have given me a board game. And it's got two premises. And you might think that they got a linear structure, and the argument goes something like this. My wife always give me a sweater or a board game. Therefore, this box does not contain a sweater. Therefore, this time she gave me a board game. That didn't make any sense, right? I mean the fact that she always give me a sweater or a board game gives me no reason to believe that this box doesn't contain a sweater. Well, okay, let's try it again. Maybe it's a branching structure. That would mean that the argument looks like this.
Play video starting at :9:4 and follow transcript9:04
My wife always gives me either a sweater or a board game. Therefore, this time she gave me a board game. And as a separate argument, this box does not contain a sweater. Therefore, this time she must have given me a board game. Neither of those arguments makes any sense. So it can't be a branching structure.
Play video starting at :9:24 and follow transcript9:24
Instead what we have here is the two premises working together. She always gives me either a sweater or a board game. And, the second premise, this box does not contain a sweater. Those two premises have to work together. It's only jointly working together that they can support their conclusion this time she must have given me a board game. How can we diagram this joint structure.
Play video starting at :9:54 and follow transcript9:54
We can put, a plus sign between premiss one and premiss two. Then draw a line under them to show that they work together, jointly.
Play video starting at :10:2 and follow transcript10:02
And take a line from that line, and draw an arrow down to the conclusion, just like in the diagram. And this is what we're going to call the joint structure. So, we've seen the linear structure, the branching structure, and the joint structure. And we can combine more than one of these structures into a single argument. To see how to do this, let's just do a slide variation on the previous example. My wife always gives me either a sweater or a board game. This box does not contain a sweater. Because it rattles when I shake it. So, this time she must have given me a board game.
Play video starting at :10:43 and follow transcript10:43
This argument combined a linear structure with a joint structure.
Play video starting at :10:49 and follow transcript10:49
There are two argument markers. One's a conclusion marker, so and that indicates that the eventual conclusion is that she must of given me a board game this time. But there's also that new word because, which indicates that the fact that it rattles when I shake it, means that it's not a sweater. So the first stage if the argument in standard form looks like this. Premise one, this box rattles when I shake it. Therefore, conclusion, this box does not contain a sweater.
Play video starting at :11:19 and follow transcript11:19
Stage two says this box does not contain a sweater. My wife always gives me either a sweater or a board game. So the conclusion, this time she must have given me a board game.
Play video starting at :11:34 and follow transcript11:34
And of course, the conclusion of that first little argument. Is identical with the premise of the second argument. So we can put them together into a chain. We can say, this box rattles when I shake it, so it must not contain a sweater. My wife always gives me a sweater or a board game so, this time she must have given me a board game. That's how we get a linear structure, combined with a joint structure. And we can use our diagram methods to diagram this argument the same way we did before. We simply start with premise one, the box rattles when I shake it, drawn an arrow down to its conclusion, namely, the box does not contain a sweater. That's two, and then we show that those are joint by adding a plus premise three, mainly, my wife always gives me either a sweater or a board game. Draw a line under them and an arrow from those two together, down to the eventual conclusion namely, four. That this time she must have given me a board game.
Play video starting at :12:43 and follow transcript12:43
The fact that the top arrow goes from premise one to two, but does not go from premise one to three, indicates that, that premise is a reason for two, but is not a reason for three. So when you use this method to diagram arguments, you have to be careful where you draw the arrows. And draw them only where there really is a rational connection. That is where one claim is being presented as a reason for that particular claim that the arrow's pointing towards. Now almost all arguments can be diagrammed using these three simple structures, that is the linear structure, the branching structure, the joint structure, and some combination of those three. You can add more premises, because you can always add one plus two plus three plus four. If there are four premises operating together in a joint structure. And you can add extra arrows if you have a branch with more than two branches, so you can cover a lot of arguments using these kinds of diagrams. The method can be described in general like this. You start by identifying the premises and the conclusions, and you number them. So that you can just have numbers instead of having to write out the whole sentence on the diagram. Then when they work together, you put a plus sign between them and draw a line under it to indicate that they're working together, they're functioning as a group. Then, you draw an arrow from the claims that are reasons to the claims that they are reasons for.
Play video starting at :14:19 and follow transcript14:19
And then you move them around on the diagram so that they form a line when it's a linear structure, and branches when it's a branching structure. That'll be easy to rearrange them. So as to show how all of the different premises, and conclusions work together in a single argumentative structure.
Play video starting at :14:37 and follow transcript14:37
That's going to be enough to accomplish this stage of reconstruction, namely to organize the parts and show how they work together in the overall argument.

# Debate about smartphones
We received a wonderful pair of arguments from a foreign language high school in South Korea.
Play video starting at ::12 and follow transcript0:12
One of the groups argued that smartphones should be banned in class, and the others argued that it shouldn't. So we can look at how they conflict with each other, and what we need to do about that.
Play video starting at ::25 and follow transcript0:25
So the first argument, which is try to show that smartphones should be banned during class, runs like this.
Play video starting at ::32 and follow transcript0:32
Many students are using smartphones during class, and this causes many problems. That kind of sets it up. That's what the problem is.
Play video starting at ::42 and follow transcript0:42
But why? Well, they are a lot of addictive apps like, social networking and games that make students check their smartphones continuously. I assume they're talking about checking them continuously during class. And it's probably not really continuously. Like, not all the time. But way too often. I know just what they're talking about, happens in my classes.
Play video starting at :1:8 and follow transcript1:08
Checking smartphones frequently prevents students from concentrating in class. Now, that tells you what the problem is. There's nothing wrong with smartphones in themselves, if you can do that and still get something out of the class. But if it prevents students from concentrating in class, that's a problem. Cause that's what the class is for. So the students can learn. And notice they don't say other students. It's also the person using the smartphone. They're both distracted. They're both prevented from concentrating in class. That's a problem.
Play video starting at :1:41 and follow transcript1:41
Next, behaviors that prevent students from concentrating during class, should be banned. We just found out that smartphones do that. Therefore, smartphones should be banned during class.
Play video starting at :1:54 and follow transcript1:54
Sounds pretty good. Of course, there are questions you could raise. But notice it, the fact that the apps are addictive. That explains why once you've got them on your phone. You can't stop yourself from using them. And you're going to use them even in class, when you know you shouldn't.
Play video starting at :2:10 and follow transcript2:10
Right? You know you should only use them outside of class, but you end up abusing them inside class cause you're addicted.
Play video starting at :2:16 and follow transcript2:16
It also says, behaviors that prevent students from concentrating in class should be banned. Eh, you could base questions about that.
Play video starting at :2:24 and follow transcript2:24
Right? Because things like hey going to the bathroom.
Play video starting at :2:29 and follow transcript2:29
Going to the bathroom during class might stop other students from concentrating, learning quite as much, but, you gotta go, you gotta go. And so, we have to allow those. So you might want to ask the qualifications about these are activities that distract other students that aren't really necessary and doing this smart phoning during class is probably not really necessary. It doesn't contribute to anybody's educational experience. So, you can fix it up a little bit. But what I want to focus on instead of trying to fix up every little detail like that, is the structure.
Play video starting at :3:6 and follow transcript3:06
The two main steps, in this argument. First, there are a lot of addictive applications or apps. If there are lots of apps then if smartphones are not banned students will check their Smartphones frequently. So if they're not banned students are going to check them.
Play video starting at :3:22 and follow transcript3:22
Then if students check their smartphones frequently then students are going to be prevented from concentrating. Therefore, if they're not banned students are going to be prevented from concentrating.
Play video starting at :3:35 and follow transcript3:35
And if not, banning something results in students being prevented from concentrating, then the schools ought to ban them because after all the point of the school is education, and that's standing in the way. Therefore, smartphones should be banned during class. So now we've got a reconstruction. Where the steps are valid and the only point I want to make for now is
Play video starting at :4:1 and follow transcript4:01
that it's got a certain kind of structure. Is it a linear structure? Or is it a branching structure? Or is it a joint structure?
Play video starting at :4:10 and follow transcript4:10
It's a linear structure. Because the conclusion of the first bit. Namely number three, if smart phones are not banned during class then the students will check their smartphones frequently in class becomes a premise in the next step. Which leads to the conclusion five which becomes a premise in the argument for the final conclusion seven. So this is a linear structure.
Play video starting at :4:34 and follow transcript4:34
Now, let's look at the argument on the other side. The other group of high school students from the same high school in South Korea argued for the opposite conclusion,
Play video starting at :4:46 and follow transcript4:46
that smartphones should be allowed in class. Of course, if they're allowed, they're not banned. So, they're disagreeing with their schoolmates.
Play video starting at :4:56 and follow transcript4:56
And here's their argument. Many people say that smartphones should be banned in schools, but they shouldn't.
Play video starting at :5:3 and follow transcript5:03
Smartphones have apps that help you study, such as dictionaries for foreign languages, and these students are in a foreign language high school so that's important.
Play video starting at :5:14 and follow transcript5:14
I believe that anything that can help students learn should be allowed in schools. Anything that can help students learn should be allowed in school. Additionally, banning smartphones can result in lack of ways for students to communicate during emergencies. Just imagine there's an emergency and you can't tell the other students that there is an emergency. People might get stuck in the school. They might not know that they need to leave.
Play video starting at :5:40 and follow transcript5:40
And that could lead to real problems.
Play video starting at :5:43 and follow transcript5:43
So because smartphones, can help students study. And because they can help them in emergency situations.
Play video starting at :5:53 and follow transcript5:53
communicate in emergency situations. Smartphones should be allowed, not banned in schools and classrooms.
Play video starting at :6:4 and follow transcript6:04
Now again, there are lots of questions you could raise. How often do these emergencies happen? Maybe communicating on the smartphone during an emergency is going to make you go more slowly and not able to escape. And so having the smartphone available will actually create more deaths or injuries during an emergency.
Play video starting at :6:24 and follow transcript6:24
And maybe using this dictionary on your smart phone during class, which seems to be helping you. Is actually stopping you from learning the language yourself. You're now dependent on the smartphone, and it might get in the way of language learning.
Play video starting at :6:41 and follow transcript6:41
So I think you could raise a lot of questions about this argument, just like the other one, but what I'm interested in here is the structure.
Play video starting at :6:50 and follow transcript6:50
So let's look at that.
Play video starting at :6:53 and follow transcript6:53
Notice that word additionally in the middle of their argument. That signals that they're really two arguments here. One is that smartphones can help students learn. And here I'm simplifying quite a bit a bit. Smartphones can help students learn, and then anything that can help students learn should be allowed in school.
Play video starting at :7:14 and follow transcript7:14
Therefore, smartphones should be allowed in school. That's the first argument. First reason to allow smartphones is that they can aid in education, and that's what schools are all about.
Play video starting at :7:25 and follow transcript7:25
So they should be allowed.
Play video starting at :7:27 and follow transcript7:27
Notice the second one, is completely independent. Smartphones can help students communicate during emergencies. Anything that can help students communicate during emergencies should be allowed in school, therefore smart phones should be allowed in schools. They're separate arguments because the second argument would also apply in offices, it should, would apply to students when they're taking exams, where they're not supposed to be getting information from dictionaries or any other information from their smartphone. There still might be an emergency. And so the different arguments apply to different circumstances, but they lead to the same conclusion, that smartphones should be allowed in schools. So what kind of structure do we have here? Do we have a linear structure, or a branching structure, or a joint structure?
Play video starting at :8:17 and follow transcript8:17
We have a branching structure. Because both sets of premises support the same conclusion.
Play video starting at :8:24 and follow transcript8:24
Now, I want to ask one more question.
Play video starting at :8:27 and follow transcript8:27
Does that mean that this argument's better than the first one. Hey, these guys have two arguments. The other group only had one argument. That's gotta be better, right?
Play video starting at :8:37 and follow transcript8:37
No. It might seem better, because if one argument fails you've got the other one left over.
Play video starting at :8:44 and follow transcript8:44
But, of course, if one argument is stronger than either of the other two put together, the first group still might have a better reason for their conclusion.
Play video starting at :8:54 and follow transcript8:54
So you can't just count the number of arguments to figure out who's winning in a disagreement like this.
Play video starting at :9:2 and follow transcript9:02
And the second point I want to make is that we ought to be looking for compromises.
Play video starting at :9:7 and follow transcript9:07
When you get a conflict like this between two groups, one wants cell phones banned, one wants smartphones allowed. Well, what the arguments do is they tell us the values at stake, what you really want from the band. Or what you really want by allowing the smartphones. And what that tells you is how to compromise. What we want to find now is some way to pass a regulation. That'll allow students to use smartphones when they're really learning, like when they're using a foreign language dictionary.
Play video starting at :9:47 and follow transcript9:47
Or, when they really need it like in an emergency. But not so frequently that they're going to interrupt other students, because they're just going on a social network or playing some kind of game that they're addicted to.
Play video starting at :10:1 and follow transcript10:01
So how're we going to do a regulation like that? Well, maybe we could allow smartphones, but only if they don't have any of those apps on them that students are going to abuse and use too frequently. Or maybe, we're going to be able to monitor their smartphones to see whether they're going on to the right types of program. Dictionaries that help them learn, emergency conversations to help people in trouble.
Play video starting at :10:28 and follow transcript10:28
And not using them for the ones that are preventing other people from learning by distracting them. Now I don't know whether you can actually have a regulation like that. But one of the nice features of arguments is that they don't just tell you these people want smartphones, these people don't want smartphones banned. Right?
Play video starting at :10:48 and follow transcript10:48
Instead, it tells you the reasons why. And by learning those reasons we get a picture of what we need in order to formulate a regulation. It'll serve the interests of both groups because they both have a really good point.

# Fill in the gaps
It's been a long and winding road, as the Beatles used to say. But we're finally at the last stages of reconstructing arguments. We've looked at stage one which is close analysis, stage two which is get down to basics stage three, which is, sharpen edges. Stage four, is organize parts. And now we're doing stage five, which is, fill in gaps. And we'll also get to stage six, which is, conclude. Stage five really consists of four separate steps. First, we need to assess the argument for validity. Then we need to add suppressed premises. Enough of them to make it valid. Then we need to assess those suppressed premises for truth or falsehood.
Play video starting at ::52 and follow transcript0:52
And then we need to qualify the suppressed premises in order to make them true. And the whole goal is to make the suppressed premises both plausible for their truth and enough to make the argument valid. So these steps within the stage really do work in tandem together to try to make the argument good. We already learned how to assess validity. You simply ask is it possible for the premises to be true and the conclusion false and if so the argument is not valid and if not the argument is valid. And the way you figure out whether it's possible is, you try to tell a story or describe a situation. And if you can describe a coherent situation where the premises are true and the conclusion is false. Then that shows that the argument's not really valid. The main topic for today is what do you do. When you assess the argument for validity and you find out it's not valid. And the answer is you add suppress premises enough of them to make the argument valid. Now that might seem like cheating. I mean you'd start with an argument that's no good. It's not valid and then you just throw in some extra premises in order to make it valid.
Play video starting at :2:4 and follow transcript2:04
Why isn't that just distorting the argument, and making up something that wasn't there? The answer, is that it's not really bad. And if it were bad, we'd all be in bad shape, because in every day life, people always take things for granted. They make assumptions. We do it too. And if we didn't, boy, our arguments would be really long and boring. So there's something to be said in favor of suppressing premises, at least the obvious ones that people really do take for granted,
Play video starting at :2:35 and follow transcript2:35
but we can also get tricked. People can suppress premises that really are questionable and they just don't want us to see that they're making that assumption. It is useful to fill out the argument with suppressed premises to make sure it really is valid, because that brings those assumptions out into the open were we can access whether or not they're true of false. Another reason to fill in suppressed premises is to understand the argument better. Because, if people suppress premises, then they're showing us some of their footprints along the path, but, if we really want to know the full path that their reasoning followed, we've gotta see every single footprint. So, the goal of bringing out the suppressed premises is to let us trace exactly where their reasoning went. From one step to another. So there are two goals. One is to trace the full path every step, and the other goal is to see if there are any missed steps or they're trying to hide something from us by getting rid of one of their footsteps. So, that's the point of bringing out surpressed premises.
Play video starting at :3:41 and follow transcript3:41
To accomplish these goals is tricky. You have to find suppress premises that are just strong enough to make the argument valid but not so strong that they're going to be implausible. because you don't want to ascribe all kinds of suppressed premises to the person that they didn't really believe and that they didn't really need for their argument. So it's kind of like Goldilocks and the Three Bears. You want suppressed premises to be not too hot, and not too cold, but just right.
Play video starting at :4:11 and follow transcript4:11
Here's an example from a previous lecture. My wife always gives me either a sweater or a board game.
Play video starting at :4:19 and follow transcript4:19
This box does not contain a sweater because it rattles. When it's shaken. So this time, she must have given me a board game. And we put this in standard form, this way, first premise, this box rattles when I shake it, and that shows you it doesn't contain a sweater. Third, she always gives me either a sweater or a board game. Conclusion, this time she must have given me a board game. Now the first step of this argument is this box rattles when I shake it and the conclusion there is it doesn't contain a sweater, that's the part of the argument that we want to focus on here and ask whether that argument is valid. No. The argument's not valid, because it's possible for the premise to be true and the conclusion false. How can that happen? Well, my wife might be fooling me. She might know that I expect either a sweater or a board game, so she puts a sweater in the box, and then she puts little rocks around the outside, so when I shake it Well here is something. So thats possible, and that shows the argument is not valid. Well, how can we make the argument valid? The question here is, can we add a suppressed premise that will turn this invalid argument into a valid argument. Here's one that will do the trick. A box that contains a sweater. Doesn't rattle when shaken. The other argument looks like this. This box rattles when I shake it. A box that contains a sweater doesn't rattle when shaken. So this box doesn't contain a sweater. The explicit premise, is that this box rattles when I shake it. The suppress premise is that a box that contains a sweater doesn't rattle when shaken, and together they're supposed to support the conclusion that this box doesn't contain a sweater, but do they really support that conclusion? Is the argument valid?
Play video starting at :6:24 and follow transcript6:24
Well, it's valid only if there's no possibility that the premises are true and the conclusion is false. Without the suppressed premise, we saw that was possible, because my wife might be fooling me and putting rocks around the sweater. So let's see if that's going to ruin the validity of this argument. No, because, if the sweater's got rocks around it, so it makes noise when I shake it, then, the premise that says a box that contains a sweater doesn't rattle when shaken, turns out to be false. So that's not a case. Where the premises are true and the conclusion's false, because the premise is false in that case. So, by adding this premise, we actually succeeded in making the argument valid. The problem of course, is that validity is not enough for a good argument, as we saw several lectures ago. You can have a valid argument that's very bad when the argument's not sound. What we want really is soundness. So that's why we need the next step. Namely, check the suppressed premises for truth. Assess whether they're true or false, and if they're not true then you need to qualify them in order to make them true, because you don't want to claim that the person giving the argument was assuming this falsehood when they didn't have to. So let's see if there's some way to qualify this surpresssed premise in order to make it true. How can we qualify this premise to make it true? How are we going to do that, let me think, oh, what about that little word only? We can add that. We could say, a box that contains only a sweater doesn't rattle when shaken.
Play video starting at :8:14 and follow transcript8:14
But the word only what exactly does that mean? We need to clarify that. What exactly does the word only exclude? It excludes something. That's the function of the word only. But what does it exclude? Well. It probably excludes other things that might make the rattling sound. Like, if my wife put rocks in the box. So, we can clarify this premise by saying. A box that contains only a sweater and not anything else that might make a rattling sound when shaken, won't rattle when shaken.
Play video starting at :8:50 and follow transcript8:50
Well is that premise true? You might quibble about details but it's close enough for now. What we need to do though is to go back and determine whether when we put that suppress premise in, the argument's valid. And the argument now looks like this. This box does rattle when shaken.
Play video starting at :9:10 and follow transcript9:10
And a box doesn't rattle when shaken if it contains only a sweater and not anything else that makes a rattling sound.
Play video starting at :9:20 and follow transcript9:20
So this box doesn't contain a sweater.
Play video starting at :9:24 and follow transcript9:24
Is that valid?
Play video starting at :9:26 and follow transcript9:26
Well, no, for the same reason we saw before, because my wife might be a trickster who puts rocks around my sweater in the birthday present box, in order to fool me.
Play video starting at :9:38 and follow transcript9:38
Then, the premises can be true, and the conclusion, false. It's possible that the first premise is true, this box rattles when I shake it. The second premise is true, a box doesn't rattle when shaken if it contains only a sweater and nothing else that makes a rattling sound.
Play video starting at :9:59 and follow transcript9:59
But it's false. If this box doesn't contain a sweater, because it still does contain a sweater and it contains a sweater in addition to those pesky little rocks that make all that rattling noise. Well if the argument's not valid we got to back to that other step and add another suppressed premise. Remember how I told you that these different steps within this stage work in tandem.
Play video starting at :10:20 and follow transcript10:20
and what's happening is, you gotta check it for validity, add a suppressed premise, recheck it for validity, maybe add another suppressed premise in. That's what we're doing now. So what kind of suppressed premise could we add? Well, we could add, my wife's not a trickster. But basically that amounts to, she wouldn't put rocks in a birthday present with a sweater in order to fool me. So we can make that a little more explicit by making the suppressed premise something like this. If this box contains a sweater, then it contains only a sweater and it doesn't include anything else that would make a rattling sound when shaken.
Play video starting at :11: and follow transcript11:00
And now, we can stick that as an extra suppressed premise into the argument. Now the argument looks like this.
Play video starting at :11:8 and follow transcript11:08
This box, rattles when I shake it. A box doesn't rattle when shaken if it contains only a sweater and not anything else that makes a rattling noise when shaken.
Play video starting at :11:20 and follow transcript11:20
If this box contains a sweater, then it contains only a sweater, and doesn't contain anything else that rattles when shaken. So this box does not contain a sweater.
Play video starting at :11:33 and follow transcript11:33
Now we have an argument that's valid. And the surpressed premises are true at least given that my wife's not a trickster which she's not I assure you, and it looks like we have a sound reconstruction. Just what we were looking for. Admittedly this argument is a lot longer and more convoluted than the original. And that shows why people suppress premises instead of talk in the way this argument goes.
Play video starting at :12:2 and follow transcript12:02
And of course many people would be perfectly well convinced by the original argument because, they share the assumptions that are in the suppressed premises. So why do we go to all the trouble to go through this process and add the suppressed premises. Remember, the reason is that we want to understand the pathway between the premises and conclusion, we want to understand how the reasoning works step by step by step.
Play video starting at :12:30 and follow transcript12:30
And we want to do that because sometimes people are going to include suppressed premises that aren't true and we want to bring them out and make those assumptions explicit so that we can assess them for truth and falsehood. And when you're talking to somebody you trust, you might not have to do that. And it's okay to suppress premises, but when you really want to know whether the argument's any good that's when you want to fill it out with the suppressed premises. The point of going into detail on this example, is to illustrate this stage of reconstruction you want to assess the argument for validity, and suppress premises that make it valid, check them for truth. If they're not true, you qualify them. Then you go back and see whether that qualification made the argument not valid anymore. And then you go back and forth, and back and forth, until you've got a sound reconstruction.
Play video starting at :13:22 and follow transcript13:22
The same steps are going to apply to all kinds of suppressed premises. And sure enough, there are all kinds of suppressed premises. So let's go through a few examples a lot more quickly in order to show the variety of suppressed premises that are assumed in arguments. Here's one example. Abraham Lincoln turned 40 on February 12th, 1849. Therefore, Charles Darwin also turned 40 on February 12, 1849. Now, is that argument valid? No chance. Of course it's possible for the premise to be true and the conclusion false.
Play video starting at :14:6 and follow transcript14:06
So we have to add a suppressed premise. The suppressed premise is that Abraham Lincoln and Charles Darwin were born on the same day, and they were it happened to be February 12, 1809. So now we've filled out the argument. Abraham Lincoln turned 40 on February 12, 1849.
Play video starting at :14:27 and follow transcript14:27
Abraham Lincoln and Charles Darwin were born on the same day. Therefore, Charles Darwin also turned 40 on February 12, 1849. Now is the argument valid? No. It's still not valid. because Darwin might have died before 1849. So we have to add another suppressed premise namely that both Abraham Lincoln and Charles Darwin lived beyond 40. So now we have a fuller argument.
Play video starting at :14:57 and follow transcript14:57
Abraham Lincoln turned 40 on February 12th 1849. Abraham Lincoln and Charles Darwin were born on the same day. Both of them lived beyond the age of 40. Therefore, Charles Darwin also turned 40 on February 12, 1849. Now the argument looks pretty good. We had to have two suppressed premises, but we finally have a valid argument. And what this shows is that sometimes the suppressed premises are purely factual matters. In this case, that they were born on the same day. And that they both lived beyond 40. So sometimes we have factual suppressed premises. Here's another quick example. You ought to obey her because she's your mother. Here the premise is that she's your mother, and the conclusion's, you ought to obey her. Well, is that argument valid? No way. because it's possible that she's your mother, but it's false that you ought to obey her. When could that happen? Maybe she was like abusive, or stupid, or whatever.
Play video starting at :16:3 and follow transcript16:03
Then maybe you ought not to obey her, even though she is your mother.
Play video starting at :16:7 and follow transcript16:07
So, we have to add a premise. Namely, you ought to obey your mother. Now, we can say she's your mother, you ought to obey your mother, therefor you ought to obey her. But of course, that is the suppressed premise you ought to obey your mother is questionable because maybe she was abusive or stupid. So let's add another suppressed premise that your mother was not abusive or stupid. Of course, we also have to qualify that moral premise that you ought to obey your mother if she's not abusive or stupid. And now the argument looks like this. She's your mother. You ought to obey your mother if she's not abusive or stupid.
Play video starting at :16:47 and follow transcript16:47
Your mother was not abusive or stupid, therefore you ought to obey her. And notice that here, we added a moral premise about the that fact that you ought to obey your mother under certain conditions namely she's not abusive or stupid. And the second premise is she was not abusive or stupid so we have a moral premise and a factual premise. Both being suppressed in the argument that you ought to obey her, because she's your mother. Here's another. It's the Sabbath. So you ought go to the Synagogue. Well, that's clearly not valid. Once suppressed premises you're Jewish. The other suppressed premise is you haven't been to Synagogue already today on this Sabbath. And the third suppressed premise is a religious norm namely Jews ought to go to the Synagogue on the Sabbath and you need that whole bunch of suppressed premises in order to get. From the premise that is the Sabbath to the conclusion that you ought to go to Synagogue. Now of course all of those premises might be questionable, some people would question them, some people would deny them, but the point here is to figure out what's being assumed by somebody who gave the original argument. And anybody who says it's the Sabbath so you ought to go to Synagogue, seems to be assuming that you're Jewish, you haven't been already, and Jews ought to go to the Synagogue on the Sabbath.
Play video starting at :18:18 and follow transcript18:18
So what these suppressed premises do is they bring out the assumptions that somebody who gave that argument must have had in mind. The last case is a little bit trickier. It has to do with linguistics suppressed premises. Janet and Bob are first cousins, therefore they share a grandparent. Now, in order to understand that argument, we have to know that first cousins always share a grandparent. That just follows from the definition of what a first cousin is.
Play video starting at :18:54 and follow transcript18:54
But, it's not quite so obvious is that all biological sisters are female, and so there's even more need to bring out that linguistic suppressed premise in this case. But it's still not necessary to make the argument valid. It's just not possible that Janet and Bob. Are first cousins, and they don't share, a grand parent. Because the suppressed premise is purely linguistic, so it's necessarily true. So, you can't possibly, be first cousins without sharing a grandparent. Still, the point of bringing out linguistic suppressed premises is to show every little step along the way the argument might be valid without those suppressed linguistic premises but we won't understand why it's valid and why the reasoning goes through unless we add the linguistic suppressed premise. So it's worth doing that. Sh, here's a trick. Don't tell anybody. Okay? It's just between me and you. You could always make any argument valid just by adding a suppressed premise that says, if the premises are true then the conclusion is true. But don't tell anybody because. If people start doing that, and they make the argument valid that way, with that suppressed premise, we're never going to understand the pathway of reasoning. It makes the argument valid, but it doesn't serve the real purpose of the unending suppressed premises, which is to understand the pathway of reasoning. So you can do that, it's a trick. It makes the argument valid, but it doesn't achieve our goal because our goal is not just to make the argument valid, it's to make the argument valid so that we can understand the pathway of reasoning.
Play video starting at :20:51 and follow transcript20:51
So, it's important to know that trick, but don't use it. Unless you have to. The examples so far have been pretty trivial, I admit it. But the same points apply in very important context, such as political debates. Politicians can suppress premises in perfectly legitimate ways they're just trying to save time and make their arguments more efficient, maybe even sometimes clearer because you don't have to add all of those little details.
Play video starting at :21:24 and follow transcript21:24
But sometimes politicians abuse suppressed premises. They take things for granted that they shouldn't be taking for granted.
Play video starting at :21:32 and follow transcript21:32
And here's an example. A politician might argue, my opponent is soft on crime because he's opposed to the death penalty, well, that assumes as a suppressed premise that anyone who's opposed to the death penalty must be soft on crime. And if the politician were to come
Play video starting at :21:53 and follow transcript21:53
out and say that it would seem pretty questionable. And that's probably why he suppresses it.
Play video starting at :22: and follow transcript22:00
And then another politician might say, but my opponent is in favor of the death penalty so he must not have read all the recent studies that show that the death penalty doesn't deter.
Play video starting at :22:13 and follow transcript22:13
Well that argument assumes a suppressed premise that if you read those studies you would be convinced by them and that the only point of the death penalty is deterrence. But the point is that politicians talking about extremely important issues can take things for granted, that if they were brought into the light of day would be very questionable, and that is why they hide them. So when you're listening to people give arguments on important issues in your life, then you ought to be looking for these suppressed premises and asking yourself whether or not you really ought to be agreeing with them about that assumption. Finally, we've finished reconstruction. Yippee, right? Oh, no, not quite. because there's one more stage. And that stage is drawing a conclusion. Of course, if we've come up with a sound reconstruction then we know that the argument is sound, and we know that the conclusion is true, because every sound argument has a true conclusion. But if we don't come up with a sound reconstruction, then what do we say? Well we kind of ask whose fault is it. It might be the fault of the argument maybe we couldn't come up with a sound reconstruction because there just is no sound reconstruction. But maybe we didn't come up with a sound reconstruction because we just weren't imaginative enough or didn't try hard enough.
Play video starting at :23:52 and follow transcript23:52
Still if we try really long and hard. And charitably interpret the argument as best we can to make it look as good as we can and we still can't make it sound, then we've at least got reason to believe that the argument's not sound. Of course, that doesn't mean that the conclusion's not true because unsound arguments can still have true conclusions.
Play video starting at :24:15 and follow transcript24:15
But at least we know that this argument doesn't prove that the conclusion's true. And so this method of reconstruction can lead us either to the belief that the argument is sound because we found a sound reconstruction or to the conclusion that the argument's not sound. Because we tried long and hard to find a sound reconstruction and didn't. But that's still not going to show us that the conclusion of the argument is false. The point of reconstruction then is to reach a conclusion on this issue of whether the argument is sound or not. And if we try our best, and do it as well as we can, and charitably, then we can be justified in believing that the argument's sound or not.

# conclude
Finally, we've finished reconstruction. Yipee! Right? Oh no, not quite. Because there's one more stage and that stage is drawing the conclusion. Of course, if we've come up with a sound reconstruction, then we know that the argument's sound and we know, that the conclusion is true, because every sound argument has a true conclusion. But, if we don't come up with a sound reconstruction, then what do we say?
Play video starting at ::33 and follow transcript0:33
Well, we gotta ask, who's fault is it. It might be the fault of the argument. Maybe we couldn't come up with a sound reconstruction 'cuz there just is no sound reconstruction. But maybe we didn't come up with a sound reconstruction because we just weren't imaginative enough. Or didn't try hard enough.
Play video starting at ::51 and follow transcript0:51
Still, if we try really long and hard. And charitably interpret the argument as best we can to make it look as good as we can, and we still can't make it sound. Then, we've at least got reason to believe that the argument's not sound. Of course, that doesn't mean that the conclusion's not true. Because unsound arguments can still have true conclusions.
Play video starting at :1:14 and follow transcript1:14
But at least we know that this argument doesn't prove that the conclusion's true. And so this method of reconstruction can lead us either to the belief that the argument is sound because we found the sound reconstruction. Or to the conclusion that the argument's not sound because we tried long and hard to find a sound reconstruction and didn't, but that's still not going to show us that's the conclusion of the argument. Is false.
Play video starting at :1:43 and follow transcript1:43
The point of reconstruction then, is to reach a conclusion on this issue of whether the argument is sound or not. And if we try our best and do it as well as we can and charitably, then we can be justified in believing that the argument is sound or not.

# Example of reconstructing
Now, we've really done it. We're finished with reconstruction. Hooray! But we want to go through it one more time in a detailed example to show how the, all the different stages fit together. And which example are we going to pick? Well, if you've been in the course this far, I bet you can guess. Robert Redford again. We're going to look at paragraph three of his article, and go through reconstruction to show that reconstruction gives you an even deeper understanding than when we first went through it using close analysis alone. Reconstruction begins with close analysis. So, the first thing I'll do is read through the passage and mark the important words in order to do a close analysis of Redford's paragraph. The BLM says its hands are tied. Remember, the BLM is the Bureau of Land Management. Why?
Play video starting at ::58 and follow transcript0:58
Because, because, is a premise marker.
Play video starting at :1:4 and follow transcript1:04
It's indicating that the sentence after it is a premise for the conclusion that the BLM's hands are tied.
Play video starting at :1:12 and follow transcript1:12
Because these lands were set aside subject to valid existing rights. You could say that valid and rights are evaluative terms, but that's not going to matter to our analysis here.
Play video starting at :1:28 and follow transcript1:28
And Conoco has a lease that gives it a right to drill.
Play video starting at :1:33 and follow transcript1:33
And notice, we've got a tricky argument marker here. Gives it, because the point of that sentence is that it's the lease that explains why it has the right to drill, or justifies the claim that it does have the right to drill. So, gives it is an argument marker. And in particular, it has the right to drill is the conclusion, so it's a conclusion marker.
Play video starting at :1:59 and follow transcript1:59
Sure, Conoco has a lease. Sure is going to be an assuring term.
Play video starting at :2:6 and follow transcript2:06
More than one, in fact. In fact, is another assuring term. But,
Play video starting at :2:14 and follow transcript2:14
but is going to be a discounting term, indicating that there's an objection being responded to.
Play video starting at :2:23 and follow transcript2:23
Those leases were originally issued without sufficient environmental study or public input. Now, you could think that originally is a guarding term. Because it's not saying that there never was sufficient environmental input, that is environmental study or public input. It might of come later just not originally, but again, that's not going to play any part in the argument itself. So, it could be a guarding term, but you can mark it if you want. But as a result, the first three words of the next sentence that's clearly an argument marker. And it's indicating that the sentence after it is a conclusion. So, it's a conclusion marker.
Play video starting at :3:4 and follow transcript3:04
None of them conveyed a valid right to drill. What's more, now, we're indicating that there's a separate argument, there's a new premise coming, another reason for the same conclusion, in deciding to issue a permit to drill right now.
Play video starting at :3:23 and follow transcript3:23
The BLM did not conduct a full analysis of the environmental impacts of drilling in these incomparable lands, but, discounting. Right? Instead determined that there would be no significant environmental harm on the basis of. This is telling you how they reached that determination, was an abbreviated review. They had an abbreviated review that justified or explained their determination. So, that's a premise marker. That didn't even look. Even is a tricky one. It's discounting an objection. It's saying, well, they looked a little bit, but they didn't look at this.
Play video starting at :4:8 and follow transcript4:08
Discounting the objection that they did look at least some. They didn't even look at drilling on the other federal leases. Okay? Sounds like, clearly a guarding term. It's not saying it is, but it sounds like Washington doublespeak. Doublespeak is bad, you don't want to doublespeak to me, and maybe to me is another guarding term. In the sense that it sounds that way to me but not to others. So we could mark that as a guard as well.
Play video starting at :4:40 and follow transcript4:40
So, we have finished stage one of reconstructing this argument. We've done a close analysis.
Play video starting at :4:48 and follow transcript4:48
The next stage is to get rid of all the excess verbiage. So we'll start a new screen and do that.
Play video starting at :4:56 and follow transcript4:56
The BLM says its hand are tied. Well, the claim is that its hands are tied. So we can get rid of the fact that the BLM says that. Why, because, we can get rid of those words, because they're going to get replaced by a dot pyramid in standard form.
Play video starting at :5:13 and follow transcript5:13
These lands were set aside subject to valid existing rights, good. And Conoco has a lease that gives it the right to drill, good. And we can get rid of, because we're going to have two separate premises there. That gives it, right. Well, that's going to be an argument marker as we saw. That's going to get replaced by another dot pyramid. Sure, Conoco has a lease, more than one in fact. Now notice there Redford is admitting what his opponent claims. But that's not going to be part of his argument. He's just saying, I recognize that. His argument is going to be based on different claims. So we can get rid of, sure, Conoco has a lease, more than one in fact. And the but, tells you that he's just answering an objection.
Play video starting at :6:2 and follow transcript6:02
These leases were originally issued without sufficient environmental study or input. That's going to be an important premise. As a result, we saw that was an argument marker. going to be replaced by a dot pyramid like the others. None of them conveyed a valid right to drill. What's more, another argument marker So, it's going to get replaced by a dot pyramid. In deciding that, to issue a permit to drill now, the BLM did not conduct a full analysis blah blah blah, but instead. That's going to be discounting terms. And that's going to be important for understanding what the sentences are doing, but it's not going to get repeated in the premise when we put it in standard form.
Play video starting at :6:44 and follow transcript6:44
They determined there'd be no significant impact on the basis of an abbreviated review that didn't even look at drilling on the other federal leases. The next step is to take all the parts that weren't crossed out, their going to be the explicit premises and conclusion in the argument, and put them into standard form. And if you think about this paragraph, there really two arguments. Because at the start, what Redford tries to do is to state what the BLM's argument was to begin with. And then he gives his own argument against what the BLM says. So, BLM's argument can be put in standard form like this.
Play video starting at :7:25 and follow transcript7:25
First premise, Conoco has a lease that gives it the right to drill. Second premise, these lands were set aside subject to valid existing rights. And those two premises lead to the conclusion that the BLM's hands were tied.
Play video starting at :7:43 and follow transcript7:43
Now, that's the BLM's arguement that Redford is arguing against. Redford's own argument on the other side starts with the premise, those leases were originally issued without sufficient environmental study or public input.
Play video starting at :7:58 and follow transcript7:58
Second premise, in deciding to issue a permit to drill now, the BLM did not conduct a full analysis of the environmental impacts of drilling on these incomparable lands. But instead determined there would be no significant environmental harm on the basis of an abbreviated review, that didn't even look at drilling on the other federal leases.
Play video starting at :8:23 and follow transcript8:23
Those two premises lead to the conclusion that none of these conveyed a valid right to drill.
Play video starting at :8:31 and follow transcript8:31
And, then there's another premise, these lands were set aside subject to valid existing rights.
Play video starting at :8:39 and follow transcript8:39
And that's supposed to lead the conclusion, this is Washington doublespeak. Well, we'll have to see what all that means when we clarify. But that's basically the standard form. It might be a good idea to double check, because you want to make sure that every sentence you didn't cross out, is somewhere there in the standard form. So, let's look back at the passage where we crossed out the excess and make sure everything is there in the standard form.
Play video starting at :9:11 and follow transcript9:11
Okay. It's all there.

The next stage is to sharpen edges. And that means clarify the premises and break them up, where doing so would help understand what they're really claiming.
Play video starting at ::13 and follow transcript0:13
So let's look first at the BLMs argument which simply says, Conoco has a lease. These lands were set aside subject to valid rights, therefore its hands are tied. We gotta clarify first of all the conclusion. Its hands are tied. What does that mean? Well, basically the BLM is claiming, I can't do anything about Conoco. You know, my hands are tied. Don't hold me responsible. There's nothing I can do, okay. They're offering an excuse. Next premise two.
Play video starting at ::46 and follow transcript0:46
These lands were set aside to subject to valid existing rights. Well, what is set aside mean? It means that you're not allowed to drill there. But subject evalid existing rights means that you are allowed to drill there if you've got a valid exisiting right. So, this premise can be restated as saying that if Conoco does have a valid existing right to drill, then the BLM must allow Conoco to drill. Okay. What about breaking up premises? What about premise 1? Well, that's one that I think we're going to have to break up. Because it says that Conoco has a lease that gives it the right to drill. And gives it, we already marked as an argument marker. Which suggests that the fact that Conoco has a lease is supposed to be a reason why it has a right to drill. So there's an argument implicit in that one sentence.
Play video starting at :1:42 and follow transcript1:42
And that means that we can take this whole argument and restate it something like this. Conoco has a lease, therefore Conoco has a valid right to drill.
Play video starting at :1:54 and follow transcript1:54
If Conoco has a valid right to drill, then the BLM must allow Conoco to drill. Therefore, the BLM must allow Conoco to drill. That is supposed to be the central force of the explicit premises and conclusions in the first part. Where the BLM gives its argument. The next part is Redford's response to this argument. Let's start with Redford's conclusion. What's he trying to show? He's trying to show the opposite of the BLM's argument. They're trying to show that their hands are tied. That is, that they can't stop Conoco from drilling. So Redford wants to show, that they can stop Conoco from drilling, or even that they must stop Conoco from drilling.
Play video starting at :2:37 and follow transcript2:37
So that's the conclusion he's trying to reach. What he says is sounds like Washington double speak to me. Well, that's 'cuz he's saying that people in Washington always say their hands are tied and can't get anything done. And he's going to argue that their hands aren't tied because they can and must stop Conoco from drilling. So we can replace the conclusion simply with the claim that the BLM must stop Conoco from drilling.
Play video starting at :3:5 and follow transcript3:05
Now we know how the argument ends.
Play video starting at :3:8 and follow transcript3:08
So let's take those premises and conclusion and number them pretty high, so that we can leave some room for the other premises that come before them.
Play video starting at :3:18 and follow transcript3:18
The next thing we need to do, is to get an argument for that central premise. Conoco does not have any valid right to drill. No here's what Redford said that the leases were originally issued without sufficient environmental study or public input, and in deciding to issue a permit now, the BLM didn't conduct a full analysis.
Play video starting at :3:42 and follow transcript3:42
Notice that they're two parts. To these claims. One is about the leases and the other is about the permit. Because in order to have a valid right to drill, Conoco needs to have a lease and a permit. Redford argues that there are problems with both the lease and the permit. But the considerations are a little different. So we need to separate those two parts into different arguments. The first part of this argument concerns the leases. He says that the leases were originally issued without sufficient environmental study or public input. Therefore, none of the leases conveyed a valid right to drill.
Play video starting at :4:23 and follow transcript4:23
Then the second part has to do with the permit.
Play video starting at :4:26 and follow transcript4:26
In deciding to issue a permit to drill now, the BLM did not conduct a full analysis therefore, none of the permits conveyed a valid right to drill. And the idea of the argument is going to be that the leases don't give them a right and the permits don't give them a right, so they ain't got no right. Wow, but that premise in that argument to show that the permit's not valid is a long premise with lots of different parts so we need to break it up. And we can figure out how to break it up by looking at the argument markers in the part of the passage that in effect constitute that premise. We know that there's a premise marker at the beginning. Once more, a discounting term. But, on the basis of, is an argument marker. Even, is a discounting term. And that breaks that long premise into parts so we can break them into A, the BLM did not conduct a full analysis of the environmental impacts of drilling on these incomparable lands. No full analysis. B, the BLM determined that there would be no significant environmental harm, okay? C, the BLM conducted only an abbrevieated review of the envorimental harm. And D, the BLM didn't even look at drilling on other federal leases. What about B? The BLM determined there would be no significant environmental impact. Well, that's what Redford opposes so that's not going to be part of his argument. How do the other three claims fit together, which is a reason for which? Well, now we're into a different step, namely organize the parts. And it's not completely clear. But it seems like Redford has 2 separate complaints. One is that the BLM did not look sufficiently hard at the environmental impact at this particular site the [UNKNOWN] plateau. The other complaint is that they didn't do a comparative analysis. And look at other leases on other federal lands to see, you know, what happens when drilling was allowed there. And when permits were issued in those other circumstances. So one claim is about this particular site and the other claim is a lack of comparison to other sites.
Play video starting at :6:46 and follow transcript6:46
These two points become even clearer in the next paragraph, if you remember that. There he said, first, I've spent considerable time on these extraordinary lands for years, and I know that an oil rig in their midst would have a major impact.
Play video starting at :7:4 and follow transcript7:04
So there, he's talking about the impact on this particular site on these particular lands. But right after that, he says, what's more. Indicating it's a separate argument, what's more. Conoco wants to drill a well to find oil. Inevitably, more rigs, more roads. New pipelines, toxic waste. And bright lights would follow to get the oil out.
Play video starting at :7:27 and follow transcript7:27
There he seems to be suggesting if he had just looked over at the other leases, you'd find that when you allow oil drilling a lot more happens than you ever expected to begin with. I'm, of course, not agreeing with this. It might be true or it might not. My point is that, this is the structure of Redford's own claims that make up his own argument. So there are two separate ways in which the review failed to be full. The first is that the BLM conducted only an abbreviated review, in the sense that they didn't look carefully at this particular site itself. And the second, is that the BLM didn't look at drilling in other places. Therefore, the conclusion is the BLM did not conduct a full analysis, that seems to be what Redford's saying in this particular sentence. Now let's bring it all together and clean it up a little bit in the process. One, all of Conoco's leases were originally issued without sufficient environmental study or public input. That's supposed to support two, none of Conoco's leases give it a valid right to drill.
Play video starting at :8:34 and follow transcript8:34
Then three, the BLM conducted an abbreviated review, they didn't look as carefully as they should've at the lands. Four, the BLM didn't look at drilling on lands under the other federal leases. This is the comparative claim. And those two are supposed to support five. The BLM did not conduct a full analysis. And whats that's supposed to show is that, six, its permit does not give Conoco a valid right to drill.
Play video starting at :9:7 and follow transcript9:07
Therefore, seven which is supposed to follow from two and six. Conoco does not have a valid right to drill. A, if Conoco does not have a valid right to drill then the BLM must not allow Conoco to drill. Therefore, the BLM must not allow Conoco to drill. Make sense? Seem fair? Hope so. I think it's a pretty good reconstruction of what Redford had in mind.

As you probably noticed already, these arguments are not valid yet. So, we need to go to the next stage, and fill in the gaps with suppressed premises.
Play video starting at ::13 and follow transcript0:13
Let's do that now. Let's start with the BLM's argument.
Play video starting at ::18 and follow transcript0:18
Is the argument from 1 to 2 valid? Is it possible that Conoco has a lease, but it doesn't have a valid right to drill? Well, sure. And so, that argument's not valid. What do we need to add, to make it valid? Well, we can add a very simple suppressed premise. If Conoco does have a lease then it has a valid right to drill. If you add that to that premise that they do have a lease, then it'll be a valid argument to the conclusion that they have a valid right to drill. Next, is the argument from 2 and 3 to 4 valid? Yes, because it's not possible that Conoco has a valid right to drill. And also, if they have a valid right to drill, then the BLM must allow them to drill. And it not be true that the BLM must allow them to drill. So, we can take this part of the argument. Which is really the BLM's argument. But it's in Redford's passage. And reconstruct it like this. Conoco has a lease. If they have a lease, then they have a valid right to drill. So they have a valid right to drill. And if they have a valid right to drill, then the BLM has to allow them to drill. So the BLM has to allow them to drill. Now we're ready for Redford's own argument. His goal is to refute the premise that we had to add to the BLM argument in order to make that argument valid. In the previous lecture, we saw that a lot of people suppress premises that are questionable. And Redford wants to show how questionable this one is. He's not going to let them get away with that old trick. Starting with 1 and 2, is the argument from 1 to 2 valid?
Play video starting at :2:3 and follow transcript2:03
No, because it's possible that the premise is true and the conclusion false.
Play video starting at :2:9 and follow transcript2:09
So what do we need to add to make it valid? Well, what we need to add is suppressed premise.
Play video starting at :2:15 and follow transcript2:15
And that suppressed premise basically says, no lease that is made without sufficient environmental study. And public input is valid. Or conveys a valid right to drill. Then, we have a valid argument from that premise plus 1 to the conclusion 2 that none of Conoco's leases give it a valid right to drill. Next comes the step from 3 and 4 to 5. Is that valid? No. 3 and 4 say that they conducted an abbreviated review and they didn't look at drilling on lands and other federal leases.
Play video starting at :2:58 and follow transcript2:58
But those might be true and it still not be true that they didn't conduct a full analysis. To explain how you get 5 out of 3 and 4, we have to add another suppressed premise. And that premise can simply say, an analysis is not full if it's abbreviated. And if it doesn't look at drilling on lands in other federal leases. Notice that I used the word, and, instead of, or, in the suppressed premise. And the reason is that I want to make Redford's argument look as good as possible. And his premise is going to be more defensible if he uses and instead of or. Because with and, the premise means that the review's not full if it's, has both of those problems. Whereas if you have or. It says that the review's not full if it has either one or the other of those problems. Now some people might say, if it's only got one of those problems, it's still a full review. You know, it's a little problem. It's a little flaw. But if it's got both of those problems, then Redford's on stronger ground in saying, together they show but that's not a full review. So if I want to make his premise look good, and that's part of the point, then I want to use and in the suppressed premise here instead of or. What about the step from 5 to 6, is that valid? No, here we need a suppressed premise too. Which one? Well, we could just add, that if the BLM did not conduct a full analysis of the environmental impact, then the permit does not give the permit holder a valid right to drill, because the process by which they obtained the permit is not a proper process. Next, what about the move from 2 and 6 to 7? 2 says that Conoco doesn't have a lease that gives it a valid right to drill. And 6 says that Conoco doesn't have a permit that gives it a valid right to drill.
Play video starting at :4:53 and follow transcript4:53
Is it possible that both of those are true, and yet the conclusion's false and Conoco does have a valid right to drill? Well yeah, if there were some other way for it to get a valid right to drill. So, to make that argument valid, we have to add another suppressed premise which says, basically, you know, if the lease and the permit don't give it a valid right to drill, it ain't got none. More formally, and more stilted, we can add a suppressed premise that says. If none of Conoco's leases gives it a valid right to drill, and Conoco's permit does not give Conoco a valid right to drill, then Conoco does not have a valid right to drill. And that should make that step of the argument valid.
Play video starting at :5:36 and follow transcript5:36
There's only one left, the step from 7 and 8 to 9. Is that valid? Yeah. It's not possible that Conoco doesn't have a valid right to drill, and if they don't have a valid right to drill, then the BLM must not allow them to drill and it not be true that the BLM must not allow Conoco to drill. So, that's valid and we don't have to add any suppressed premise to that one.
Play video starting at :6:7 and follow transcript6:07
And now we can take all these different explicit premises and conclusions, and put them together with a suppressed premises that we just talked about. And we end up with this final reconstruction. 1, all of Conoco's leases were originally issued without sufficient environmental study or public input. 2, no leases that were originally issued without sufficient environmental study or public input give the leaseholder a valid right to drill. Therefore, none of Conoco's leases give it a valid right to drill. 4, the BLM conducted an abbreviated review. 5, the BLM didn't look at drilling on lands under other federal leases. 6, an analysis is not full if it's abbreviated and it does not look at drilling on lands under other federal leases. Therefore 7, the BLM did not conduct a full analysis of the environmental impacts of drilling on these incomparable lands. 8, if the BLM does not conduct a full analysis of the environmental impacts of drilling in these incomparable lands, before issuing a permit, then, that permit does not give the permit holder a valid right to drill.
Play video starting at :7:28 and follow transcript7:28
Therefore 9, Conoco's permit does not give Conoco a valid right to drill.
Play video starting at :7:36 and follow transcript7:36
10, if none of Conoco's leases gives it a valid right to drill and Conoco's permit does not give Conoco a valid right to drill, then Conoco does not have a valid right to drill. Therefore 11, Conoco does not have a valid right to drill.
Play video starting at :7:54 and follow transcript7:54
12, if Conoco does not have a valid right to drill, then the BLM must not allow Conoco to drill. Therefore 13. The BLM must not allow Conoco to drill.
Play video starting at :8:7 and follow transcript8:07
Of course, other reconstructions could be perfectly fine. Even if they differ in a few details. Because not every step in this process is purely mechanical. So it doesn't always yield exactly the same results every time. But I hope that this reconstruction seems plausible, as a guess at what was going on in Redford's mind. And the reasons that he had for thinking that the BLM should stop the drilling. If we want, we can check to make sure the structure makes sense, by trying to diagram it. So here's a diagram that I made of the structure of the argument that I just reconstructed.
Play video starting at :8:47 and follow transcript8:47
To the left, you see 1 plus 2, and an underline under it. Saying that those premises work together in a joint structure. And an arrow to the conclusion from those two premises, namely 3.
Play video starting at :9:2 and follow transcript9:02
Then to the right of that, you see that 4, 5, and 6 are joined. 4 plus 5 plus 6 and an underline with an arrow to 7 because that's the conclusion that those three premises support. 7 plus 8 is then underlined to show they work jointly to lead to the conclusion 9. So there's an arrow to 9. And then there's a long underline between 3, 9, and 10. That other supressed premise that was added. That shows that 3, 9, and 10 work together jointly, and lead to the conclusion 11. And then 11 works together with 12, so you have 11 plus 12, and that's underlined with an arrow to 13. Now the fact that we can draw this diagram confirms that the argument structure makes sense.
Play video starting at :9:58 and follow transcript9:58
Now, let's see whether you can do it yourself in the exercises.
